                                Motifs, Phrases, and Beyond: The Modelling of
                                     Structure in Symbolic Music Generation
                                                1[0009−0008−2045−6319]                 2[0000−0002−4887−6947]
                               Keshav Bhandari                       and Simon Colton
                                                         1 k.bhandari@qmul.ac.uk
                                                          2 s.colton@qmul.ac.uk
                                            School of Electronic Engineering and Computer Science
                                                      Queen Mary University of London
                                     Abstract. Modelling musical structure is vital yet challenging for ar-
                                     tiﬁcial intelligence systems that generate symbolic music compositions.
                                     This literature review dissects the evolution of techniques for incorpo-
                                     rating coherent structure, from symbolic approaches to foundational and
                                     transformative deep learning methods that harness the power of compu-
                                     tation and data across a wide variety of training paradigms. In the later
                                     stages, we review an emerging technique which we refer to as “sub-task
                                     decomposition” that involves decomposing music generation into sep-
                                     arate high-level structural planning and content creation stages. Such
                                     systems incorporate some form of musical knowledge or neuro-symbolic
                                     methodsbyextracting melodic skeletons or structural templates to guide
                                     the generation. Progress is evident in capturing motifs and repetitions
                                     across all three eras reviewed, yet modelling the nuanced development of
                                     themes across extended compositions in the style of human composers
                                     remains diﬃcult. We outline several key future directions to realize the
                                     synergistic beneﬁts of combining approaches from all eras examined.
                                     Keywords: Generative Music · Deep Learning · Computerized Music
                               1   Introduction
                               Musical structure embodies the thoughtful organizationof fundamental elements
                               such as pitch, harmony, rhythm, and timbre in a composition [50]. Structure
        arXiv:2403.07995v1  [cs.SD]  12 Mar 2024gives a sense of coherence, unity, and direction to the piece. On a basic level,
                               notes are organized into motives and phrases. These phrases are then combined
                               into higher-level sections such as verses, choruses and melodic segments. The
                               repetition, variation, and development of musical ideas and themes manifest in
                               the music and create relationships between these sections to form an overar-
                               ching structure. Understanding and perceiving this musical structure is key to
                               appreciating and enjoying music for listeners [24].
                                  Musical structure is undoubtedly a crucial aspect of people’s cognitive pro-
                               cess that inﬂuences their perception of music [39,59,60]. Surprisingly, research
                               involving infants as young as four and a half years old suggests that musical
                               experience might not be a prerequisite for perceiving musical phrase structures
                2  K. Bhandari and S.Colton
                [37]. Studies focusing on rhythm have delved into perceptual elements like timing
                and tempo [28] and syncopated patterns [22]. For human listeners, perceiving
                musical structure can be thought of as a pattern recognition task [65]. As we
                listen, we segment the music into motives, phrases, and sections. We identify
                similarities, repetitions, variations, and points of departure over time. Through
                this process, we form a mental representation of the music’s structure. However,
                human memory’s limitations become evident when individuals struggle to re-
                call details; instead, they remember speciﬁc impactful moments [50] and distinct
                fragments rather than entire compositions, highlighting the selective nature of
                musical memory [48,65].
                 Given this understanding, songwriters strategically incorporate catchy repet-
                itive phrases to enhance memorability and emotional impact for listeners [79,43].
                However, Burns [6] argues that repetition gains meaning through its relation-
                ship with change. Both endless repetition and constant variation could lead to
                monotony. Thus, repetition and change are opposite possibilities from moment
                to moment in music. The tension between them can be a source of meaning
                and emotion. For example, in pop music, the repetition of verse and chorus sec-
                tions helps emphasize music ideas, while the contrast between verse and chorus
                can create more emotional intensity [44]. Similarly, within Western tonal mu-
                sic, artists leverage repetition of harmonic progressions (sequences of chords) to
                guide listeners through a journey that creates dramatic narratives, conveying a
                sense of conﬂict that demands a resolution [39,62].
                 While structure and predictability are key for many applications involving
                composition, cognitive science and musical therapy [69], some contexts like video
                game and social media music require adaptive, event-driven approaches [2]. The
                music in video games often evolves in response to the player’s progress, creating
                a unique journey for each player. In this scenario, long-term structural plans
                around musical form might be impractical, as the musical narrative needs to
                be ﬂexible and responsive to the unfolding events in the game. Similarly, so-
                cial media music quickly sets moods with catchy hooks rather than intricate
                structures [23]. Additionally, avant-garde music is another area that deliberately
                challenges conventional musical structures, requiring artists to explore abstract
                and unpredictable forms that push listener expectations.
                 From a computational perspective, automatically analyzing and generating
                musical structure poses challenges for music research. Unlike other art forms like
                stories which have explicit plot structures, the “language” of music structure is
                more abstract and relies heavily on repetition, variation, and development of
                themes. This makes explicitly modelling musical structure diﬃcult. While well-
                structured music generation with AI spans both raw audio and symbolic (sheet)
                music domains, this literature review speciﬁcally focuses on research pertaining
                to musical structures in the symbolic domain. While there has been a plethora
                of surveys on music generation systems, recent surveys such as [5,7,12,35,42,61]
                have covered works that use deep learning techniques. Among these, [7] touches
                uponearlydeeplearning methods built upon recurrent neural networks (RNNs),
                and generative adversarial networks (GANs), while placing greater emphasis on
                                                                              Motifs, Phrases, and Beyond       3
                                symbolic methods. Similarly, [5] also surveys early deep learning models until
                                Music Transformer [33]. Furthermore, [42] and [61] have a very narrow focus
                                on multi-track music using GANs and three speciﬁc deep learning models re-
                                spectively. While [35] is comprehensive in their selection of papers by area of
                                application, our literature review diﬀers in two ways. First, we oﬀer a deeper
                                analysis on structure by exclusively focusing on studies that aim to improve
                                musical structure in their methodology. Our selection of papers predominantly
                                spans between 2007 to 2023. Early papers spanning this time frame can be seen
                                in section 2 which provides a foundational overview by covering symbolic meth-
                                ods before delving into later advancements using deep learning in section 3.
                                Second, we examine an emerging “subtask decomposition” approach in section
                                4 that breaks down the music generative process into smaller steps incorporat-
                                ing neuro-symbolic methods or musical knowledge. Reﬂecting on this trend, we
                                address future directions for modelling long term musical structure in section 5.
                                2    Symbolic Methods
                                In early work on computerized music generation with long-term structure, [16]
                                proposes a reinforcement learning approach on top of a Variable-Length Markov
                                modelformusicalstyleimitationandimprovisationwithlongtermdependencies.
                                Multiple agents model diﬀerent musical attributes (e.g. pitch, rhythm, harmony)
                                to capture the anticipatory foundations of musical expectation in a collabora-
                                tive yet competitive framework. The chosen “behavior” agent for each episode
                                takes actions and updates the others’ policies accordingly. Agents leverageFactor
                                Oracles, which compactly gather repetitive sequence factors, enabling eﬃcient
                                access to long musical contexts. Results modeling Bach inventions demonstrates
                                the model’s sensitivity to phrase boundaries, which clearly segment the score
                                into formal sections.
                                   The authors of [53] propose a constraint programming approach for con-
                                trolled generation of Markov sequences, with applications to music. They for-
                                mulate the Markovian property as a cost function represented by stacks of El-
                                ementary Markov Constraints and generate sequences by exploring the space
                                of all sequences satisfying both the constraints and optimizing the Markovian
                                cost. A key advantage of this approach is the ability to specify arbitrary struc-
                                tural constraints beyond just Markovian properties and ﬁnd globally optimal
                                solutions through search rather than greedy methods. These constraints can en-
                                code musical structures like repetition, motifs, endings, etc. Diﬀerent Markovian
                                cost functions can also bias generation towards more structured sequences. In
                                addition, the model performs chunk-wise generation which allows it to main-
                                tain structure over long sequences (full songs) rather than just short clips. The
                                chunks can be stitched to maintain longer-term dependencies.
                                   Another notable example of a Markov approach for generating music with
                                long-term repetitive and phrasal structure is the Racchmaninof-Jun2015 algo-
                                rithm [13]. In this study, the authors develop a Markov model for inheriting long-
                                term repetitive structure from template pieces using the SIACT pattern discov-
                4  K. Bhandari and S.Colton
                ery algorithm from [15]. The beat-relative-MIDI state space representation used
                in their paper is an improvement over a previous model called Racchmaninof-
                Oct2010[14] that uses beat-spacing state space representation in which the spac-
                ing diﬀerence with respect to the previous note could consist of tonally obscure
                representations. Using the extracted structural framework of a template piece,
                the Markov model can generate complete musical textures in a forward as well
                as backward generative way to form phrases that are perceived as having a be-
                ginning, middle and an end.
                 Herremans et al., [27] present an application of Markov models combined
                with Variable Neighbourhood Search (VNS) to generate structured music in
                the style of Bagana, a traditional lyre from Ethiopia. The structure of Bagana
                pieces are encoded as cyclic patterns capturing repetitive cycles and global form.
                These patterns are realized by the VNS optimization technique that generates
                candidate melodies ﬁtting the predeﬁned structure of a template piece. A ﬁrst
                order Markov model learned from the Bagana corpus is used in the next step to
                evaluate how well the melody matches the corpus statistics and musical struc-
                ture. The VNS then selects the melodies optimizing the objectives to improve
                over iterations. While the Markov model does not directly generate notes, it pro-
                vides the statistical basis for the objective functions guiding the VNS to produce
                melodies adhering to the structure with stylistic consistency. The integration of
                optimization and statistical learning helps in structuring music in Bagana’s style.
                 Morpheus [26] extends the VNS approach to polyphonic music, with auto-
                matic detection of more complex long term patterns in the template piece with
                respectto auser-speciﬁedtensionproﬁle.Morpheuscomprises3componentsthat
                are core to its framework. First, the authors use the COSIATEC and SIATE-
                CComPress [47] pattern detection algorithms to extract repeated note patterns
                from a template piece. Users can choose between COSIATEC, which captures
                eachnoteinpreciselyonepattern,orSIATECCompress,whichcapturesmorere-
                lationships between diﬀerent notes, resulting in overlapping patterns. This allows
                imposing long-term structure in the generated music. Second, these patterns are
                then constrained in a VNS optimization framework that assigns pitches to gener-
                ate new music matching a target tension proﬁle. And ﬁnally, tension used in the
                VNSoptimizationalgorithmis quantiﬁedusingthe spiralarraymodel of tonality
                developed in [25]. While Morpheus has received favorable feedback overall, cer-
                tain limitations are evident from a structural perspective. These include limited
                ﬂexibility in pattern detection and the absence of captured variations or trans-
                formations, attributed to the pattern recognition algorithms used. Additionally,
                Morpheus is restricted in developing motifs, primarily repeating patterns with-
                out sophisticated development, and lacks a formal quantitative evaluation of
                structure retention, relying solely on informal listening tests for assessment.
                 Genetic algorithms, a class of evolutionary computing approaches that are
                inspired by the principles of natural selection, have also been explored in the con-
                cept of evolving musical motifs and structures over generations. For example, in
                [63], the authors propose an automatic music composition system called Phrase
                Imitation-based Evolutionary Composition (PIEC) that generates new melodies
                                                                              Motifs, Phrases, and Beyond       5
                                with structure and form by imitating phrases from a sample melody composed
                                by people. The framework uses a genetic algorithm along with intraphrase and
                                interphrase rearrangement to mimic the ascending or descending melodic pro-
                                gression and note distribution of phrases in the sample melody. Similarly, in [1],
                                the authors use a genetic algorithm to generate variations on a musical piece.
                                To ensure that the generated variations have the underlying melodic skeleton of
                                the original piece, the paper derives a melodic similarity ﬁtness function from
                                the spiral array model proposed in [9].
                                3    Deep Learning Methods
                                Symbolic methods, though useful in their versatility, are limited in their de-
                                velopment across diverse musical datasets because they rely heavily on speciﬁc
                                templates and encode strict musical rules, potentially restricting the generated
                                music. In contrast, deep learning breaks free from these constraints. By learning
                                from extensive datasets, deep learning models understand complex patterns and
                                functions, and exploit locality through the use inductive biases. This enables
                                them to contribute to improved quality in applications such as prompt based
                                conditional generation, unconditional generation with no inputs or assistance,
                                musical inﬁlling as well as accompaniment generation [45].
                                3.1   Foundational Deep Learning Techniques
                                Lookback RNN and Attention RNN [66] by Google Magenta were two notable
                                approaches early in the deep learning era that modeled long term structure in
                                the generated melodies. Lookback RNN encoded repeating patterns from 1 or
                                2 bars ago in the input to allow the RNN model to identify repeating events
                                better in the generated melody. Attention RNN used an earlier version of the
                                self-attention mechanism from [3] to generate melodies with longer dependen-
                                cies without storing information in the LSTM cell’s state. However, while these
                                improvements are noticeable over brief periods, they may not necessarily impact
                                the higher-level structural aspects of the piece.
                                   Building on the Lookback RNN model, the authors of StructureNet [46]
                                propose an enhancement at the generation stage of an RNN based melody gen-
                                eration model that induces repetition and structure in the generated melodies.
                                StructureNet is trained on sequences of structural elements like repeats extracted
                                from a dataset of melodies. When generating new melodies, it runs alongside the
                                melody RNN model, biasing it towards notes that would form repeats similar to
                                those seen in the training data. To evaluate if StructureNet improves structure,
                                the authors compared statistics related to repeats as well as pitch and rhythm
                                distributions between melodies generated with and without StructureNet. The
                                results showed that StructureNet increased the occurrence and lengths of re-
                                peats, matching the melodies in the training data more closely, while preserving
                                pitch and rhythm characteristics.
                            6      K. Bhandari and S.Colton
                               In another study, [8], the authors proposed using WaveNet [51], a genera-
                            tive model based on dilated convolutional neural networks, for generating new
                            melodies that ﬁt a given chord progression. They found WaveNet was able to
                            better learn musical structure compared to its LSTM counterpart. This is be-
                            cause the WaveNet model encodes melodic structure more explicitly through
                            its dilated convolutions across multiple time scales. Each layer doubles the re-
                            ceptive ﬁeld of the previous layer, allowing it to learn dependencies over larger
                            spans of melody. In contrast, an LSTM relies solely on its internal memory to
                            capture structure, which is less explicit. As a result, WaveNet was able to gen-
                            erate coherent rhythms and melodies over many time steps that exhibited more
                            repetitive patterns and long-range dependencies over the LSTM baseline that
                            was reﬂective of compositional structure.
                            3.2  Transformative Deep Learning Approaches
                            Along the lines of model based enhancements for inducing structure in longer
                            compositionsisMusicTransformer[33],whichusesthetransformermodelequipped
                            with the relative attention mechanism. This allows the model to learn patterns
                            based on relative distances between events, making it easier to capture motifs
                            and repetition on multiple timescales. However, this approach doesn’t explicitly
                            capture abstract structural elements such as how musical phrases and sections
                            transition and develop over time. Additionally, when generating longer music
                            pieces (over a minute), the model is not able to adhere to the initial prompt
                            sequence and produces output with poor musicality and global structure.
                               In[4], the authorsintroducedLong-ShortTermUniversalTransformer(LSTUT),
                            a fusion of transformers and RNNs, aiming to capture both local patterns and
                            extensive musical relationships. This approach stemmed from a fundamental hy-
                            pothesis: the intertwining of recurrence for short-term structure and attention
                            for long-term dependencies enhances inductive biases, enabling the modelling of
                            music spanning several minutes. However, while their methodology is promising,
                            the evaluation is somewhat limited. Their assessment primarily relies on cross-
                            entropy loss and manual inspection of attention heads to decipher the learned
                            musical features. The lack of a subjective test and absence of generated samples
                            restricts a comprehensive understanding of the model’s potential.
                               Along the lines of feature representation based enhancements is the Pop mu-
                            sic transformer [34] in which the authors propose REMI (revamped MIDI derived
                            events) to represent MIDI data following the way humans read them. REMI uses
                            position and bar events to embed an explicit beat/bar grid, tempo events to al-
                            low ﬂexible tempo changes, and chord events to represent harmony. This equips
                            models with a sense of rhythm and harmonic structure to better learn musical
                            dependencies. Pop Music Transformer uses REMI with a Transformer-XL back-
                            bone. Objective evaluation shows the model generates piano compositions with
                            more consistent rhythm and clearer downbeats compared to baselines that use
                            the MIDI-like representation [52]. Subjective listening tests also indicate REMI
                            results in more pleasing and coherent continuations of given musical prompts.
                            While REMI oﬀers a simple yet eﬀective way to inject musical inductive biases
                                                                              Motifs, Phrases, and Beyond       7
                                into sequence models through data representation, the input sequence length
                                can be a point of concern for music of longer duration.
                                   The Theme Transformer model [58] eﬀectively tackles the constraints of Mu-
                                sic Transformer by incorporating thematic materials into the generated outputs.
                                Initially, the authors employ an unsupervised approach, combining contrastive
                                learning with clustering techniques to extract recurring thematic patterns from
                                2-bar melodic segments. These themes are then integrated into a transformer en-
                                coder, and music generation occurs through a transformer decoder, which cross-
                                attends to the encoder. The architecture of the Theme Transformer incorporates
                                gated parallel attention and theme-aligned positional encoding. This design en-
                                sures the sustained inﬂuence of the thematic condition over extended generation
                                periods. This is achieved by modulating between the self-attention mechanism
                                based on the decoder’s auto-regressive inputs and the cross-attention from the
                                encoder’s thematic outputs. Evaluations demonstrate that the Theme Trans-
                                former excels in generating music with repeated thematic elements compared to
                                prompt-based Transformers. However, it faces challenges in creating variations
                                and evolving the recurring themes, showcasing areas for potential improvement.
                                   In [32], a novel R-Transformer model is introduced, aiming to tackle the
                                under-explored problem of modelling varied motif repetitions. To facilitate this,
                                a new music repetition dataset comprising over 500,000 labeled motif repeti-
                                tions across 5 types is constructed from an existing piano music dataset. R-
                                Transformer combines a Transformer encoder for note representation learning
                                and a repetition-aware learner that exploits repetition characteristics based on
                                musictheory,enablingcontrolledgenerationofdesignatedrepetitions.Themodel
                                is trained using both reconstruction and classiﬁcation losses. Evaluations show
                                it outperforms baseline models in generating varied high-quality repetitions of
                                motifs and creates subjectively more enjoyable music than prior models, as rated
                                by both musicians and non-musicians. This is attributed to explicitly modelling
                                repetition types and their combinations, which prior generative models overlook.
                                3.3   Hierarchical Neural Networks
                                There exists a class of models that draw inspiration from the hierarchical nature
                                of musical elements like notes, chords, bars, phrases, and movements. These mod-
                                els leverage this inherent hierarchy by employing specialized network structures
                                to dissect and generate intricate melodic sequences.
                                   MeloNet[29]isanearlyexampleofasmallfeed-forwardbasedneuralnetwork
                                architecture that uses a hierarchical approach to generate melodic variations in
                                Baroque style given a melody input. Speciﬁcally, it employs two neural networks
                                operating at diﬀerent timescales - a “supernet” that predicts motif classes at
                                a higher level based on the melody and previous motifs, and a “subnet” that
                                generates the actual notes based on the motif, harmony, and previous notes.
                                   Similarly, [70] introduces a hierarchical RNN model for monophonic melody
                                generation, employing three Long-Short-Term-Memory (LSTM) sub-networks
                                that operate in a sequential manner: generating bar proﬁles, beat proﬁles, and
                                notes. The outputs of higher-level sub-networks guide the generation of ﬁner
                            8      K. Bhandari and S.Colton
                            melodycomponentsinlower-levelsub-networks.Thesubjectiveexperimentscon-
                            ducted using this hierarchical approach demonstrate improved melodic quality
                            and long term structure over MidiNet [74] and MusicVAE [55].
                               Expanding on this concept, Guo et al. [79] employed a three-tiered hierarchi-
                            cal RNN to simultaneously model rhythmic and pitch structures. This approach
                            allowed the model to capture hierarchical musical relationships across varying
                            time scales, evident in the presence of more repeated patterns indicated by a
                            higher compression ratio metric. MusicFrameworks [17] adopted a multi-step hi-
                            erarchical process, breaking down melody generation into manageable subtasks
                            guided by music frameworks. This method facilitated the use of simpler models
                            trained with less data, enabling the creation of long-term structures, including
                            repetitions, within full-length melodies.
                               AnothernotableexampleofahierarchicaltransformermodelisHAT(Harmony-
                            AwareHierarchicalMusicTransformer)proposedin[77]. HATleveragesmusical
                            harmony to jointly model form and texture structure for pop music generation.
                            HATrepresents music as tokens with attributes like notes, chords and phrases,
                            and uses Transformer blocks in a three tiered hierarchy to capture structure at
                            diﬀerent levels. Subjective as well as objective experiments on musical structural
                            attributes show HAT generates pop music with improved coherence in form and
                            stability in texture compared to prior methods. However, there is still room for
                            performance improvement for longer chord progressions and ending sections.
                            3.4  Long Sequence / Eﬃciency Models
                            A class of models hypothesize generating longer sequences is key to improving
                            musical quality and structure, a notion grounded in the observation that train-
                            ing data often surpasses the capabilities of standard full-attention vanilla trans-
                            former models. The Compound Word Transformer work [31] groups consecutive
                            music tokens into “compound words” and processes them together for compact-
                            ness. This allows their model to handle longer sequences to capture long term de-
                            pendencies and induce structure. In a user study, the authors demonstrated im-
                            provedstructural outcomes during unconditional generation. Similarly, MuseNet
                            [11] adopts the Sparse Transformer [10] architecture, expanding the context win-
                            dow to 4096 tokens. The aim is to generate music with extended structural co-
                            herence from a given prompt. Another notable advancement is Museformer [75],
                            a Transformer model for long sequence symbolic music generation that captures
                            musical structure through a ﬁne and coarse-grained attention mechanism. It al-
                            lows each token to directly attend to selected “structure-related” bars based
                            on statistical analysis of common repetitive patterns in music, providing ﬁne-
                            grained attention for modelling local structures. All other non-structure-related
                            bars are summarized via coarse-grained attention to retain necessary context
                            while greatly reducing computation compared to full attention. This combined
                            approach eﬃciently generates long, structured musical sequences by capturing
                            repetitive patterns and variations through ﬁne-grained attention, while still in-
                            corporating global context. However, one limitation is that the bar selection
                                                                              Motifs, Phrases, and Beyond       9
                                is based on statistics and may not generalize perfectly to all music. The Sym-
                                phonyNet [41] approach introduces a permutation invariant byte pair encoding
                                (BPE)representation for symbolic symphony music generation. The BPE repre-
                                sentation is proposed to preserve note structure through a compressed encoding
                                scheme by preventing the overﬂow of long sequence multi-instrument tokens.
                                3.5   Pre-training Methods
                                Pre-training involves training a model on a large unlabeled dataset before ﬁne-
                                tuning it for a speciﬁc task, aiding the model in learning general representations
                                applicableto downstreamtasks.Pre-trainingcanproveadvantageousinsymbolic
                                musicgenerationtasksduetothe intricate,multi-dimensionalstructureof music,
                                encompassinglocalandglobalpatternsinvolvingelementslikepitch,rhythmand
                                dynamics. Music’s high complexity makes it important to learn musical syntax
                                and patterns from vast datasets, enhancing coherence during ﬁne-tuning. How-
                                ever, compared to other domains like text, there are fewer large-scale structured
                                symbolic music datasets available [45,57,73] for task speciﬁc problems. Utilizing
                                unlabeled data through pre-training facilitates transfer learning [30], enabling
                                models to leverage discovered patterns and structures when ﬁne-tuning on lim-
                                ited task-speciﬁc datasets, maximizing the utility of available labeled data. A few
                                studies [21,40,57,67,73] have explored pre-training in the symbolic music domain
                                aimed at generation with better musical structure and overall coherence.
                                   In the LakhNES project [21], the authors pre-trained a Transformer-XL
                                model using language modelling on a large MIDI dataset. This was then ﬁne-
                                tuned on multi-instrumental music generation. The goal was to leverage the
                                patterns learned during pre-training to generate more coherent long-form music.
                                SongMASS[57] also used a masked language modelling approach to pre-train an
                                encoder-decoder model. They speciﬁcally lengthened the masked spans during
                                pre-training to capture longer-term repetitive structures like verses and cho-
                                ruses. This helped generate songs with improved global structure. MuseBERT
                                [67] and MRBERT [40] adapted BERT [20], a language representation model
                                for various downstream music generation tasks by pre-training on piano music
                                segments. They proposed techniques to handle music’s polyphonic and multi-
                                dimensional nature compared to text. Recently proposed MelodyGLM [73] in-
                                troduces a multi-task pre-training framework to model both local patterns and
                                long-term structure in melodies. It uses melodic n-grams and long span masking
                                objectives tailored to music during pre-training. MelodyGLM also constructs
                                a large-scale melody dataset to enable robust pre-training. Both objective and
                                subjective evaluations demonstrate MelodyGLM’s ability to generate melodies
                                with improved structure and coherence.
                                4    Subtask Decomposition
                                In the context of deep learning, a new method has emerged which involves de-
                                composing the training and generation process into smaller, more manageable
                10 K. Bhandari and S.Colton
                steps (typically 2 stages). First, a high-level structure or plan for the music piece
                is created, outlining its organization and patterns. In the second stage, the actual
                musical content, such as notes and chords, is generated while adhering to this
                plan. This separation helps in addressing the challenges of modelling long-term
                structures and generating details locally. The plan ensures overall coherence,
                while the detailed music is ﬁlled in from the bottom-up, providing a holistic mu-
                sical composition. There are two notable diﬀerences between pre-training and
                subtask decomposition methods. The former involves the use of the ﬁrst pre-
                trained model in the ﬁne-tuning stage whereas the latter involves an entirely
                separate model in the ﬁnal stage. Second, the subtask decomposition framework
                explicitly models musical structure through repeated patterns or an outline of a
                melodicskeletoninitsinitial stage.Additionally, while subtasks couldbe thought
                of as a hierarchy, what separates them from the hierarchical models in section
                3.3 is that the latter trains a single model in a hierarchical fashion. In contrast,
                subtask decomposition approaches may involve multiple training objectives.
                 Anearlydesignofthis frameworkcanbeseenin [65] in which the authors use
                modular planning theory to generate tree like structures at multiple levels which
                are referred to as sentences, double phrases and phrases. Each level aﬀects the
                next through object dependencies and constraints. These planning structures are
                then ﬁlled with musical material using a bottom-up Markov based generation
                technique. Their results show that automated planning can eﬃciently produce
                repetition and novelty in melodies, resembling human compositions.
                 In another study, [68] the authors focus on the problem of drum pattern
                generation, speciﬁcally drum sequences that are rhythmically and structurally
                compatible with a given melodic track. The proposed model uses a two stage
                generation framework. In the ﬁrst stage, a variational autoencoder (VAE) gener-
                ative adversarial network from [38] is trained to generate a self-similarity matrix
                (SSM) for the drum track given the SSM of the melodic track. This drum SSM
                captures the structural information of the music. In the second stage, another
                VAE model then generates the actual MIDI drum patterns conditioned on the
                drum SSM and using a bar selection mechanism to encourage self-repetition.
                Objective and subjective tests conducted against baselines yielded promising
                outcomes. Objective and subjective tests against baselines showed promising re-
                sults, highlighting the model’s enhanced performance due to its incorporation of
                global song structure through the drum SSM.
                 Similarly, PopMNet [71] proposes a two stage process for the generation of
                pop melodies with well deﬁned long term structure. It represents melody struc-
                ture as a directed acyclic graph capturing repetitive and sequential relationships
                between bars. In the ﬁrst stage, a convolutional GAN model is trained on this
                graph based structural representation to generate plausible melodic structures.
                In the second stage, an RNN model is then trained to generate the actual melody
                conditioned on the structure and chords from the ﬁrst stage. Human evaluations
                reveal that melodies generated by PopMNet receive higher ratings in terms of
                enjoyability, humanness, smoothness, and structure compared to previous mod-
                els such as AttentionRNN [66], LookbackRNN [66], MidiNet [74], and Music
                                                                              Motifs, Phrases, and Beyond      11
                                Transformer [33]. The analysis shows that PopMNet melodies exhibit repetition
                                patterns similar to real pop songs, a feature previous models struggled to cap-
                                ture. However, one limitation of the model is its inability to capture complex
                                structural patterns beyond repetitions and sequences.
                                   Melons [80] overcomes PopMNet’s limitations by utilizing a more complex
                                multi-edge graph representation of musical structure, incorporating 8 types of
                                bar-level relations compared to PopMNet’s focus on repetition and rhythm se-
                                quences. Additionally, Melons adopts a Transformer architecture for both struc-
                                tureandmelodygeneration,anupgradefromPopMNet’sCNNandRNNmodels.
                                In cases where no edges exist between bars, an unconditional transformer model
                                generates melodies. Conversely, when relationships exist, a conditional trans-
                                former model is employed, considering the previous 8 bars and pairwise bar
                                relationships as context. While Melons outperforms PopMNet in structure and
                                overall musicality, there’s still a gap between generated melodies and human-
                                created music. About 80% of the bars in the dataset used in the study cover
                                the proposed relations, suggesting potential room for improvement by exploring
                                additional structural relationships between bars.
                                   In [18], the authors present a modular approach for generating stylistic pop
                                music by imitating a single seed song. This approach uses purely statistical
                                and rule-based methods to capture distinctive melodic, harmonic, rhythmic, and
                                structural attributes from the seed song. A proposed structure alignment pro-
                                cedure helps adhere to the stylistic section lengths and repetition patterns of
                                the seed song. Separate generative models produce melody lines, chord progres-
                                sions, bass-lines, and overall song structure. The generated songs are evaluated
                                using both objective similarity metrics and subjective listening tests. While re-
                                sults show the model can produce enjoyable, novel music that listeners recognize
                                as similar to the seed song, the authors acknowledge the potential for enhanc-
                                ing musical quality by combining their knowledge-based method with advanced
                                deep learning techniques. They note that much of the model’s success stems from
                                making good sequential choices guided by music theory and statistics. However,
                                more sophisticated deep learning sequence models may be able to make even
                                better choices for the next note in a generated sequence. The challenge would be
                                retaining the beneﬁts of the knowledge-based structure and harmony modelling
                                while leveraging the pattern learning strengths of deep networks.
                                   WuYun[76]proposesahierarchicaltwo-stageskeleton-guidedmelodygenera-
                                tion architecture that incorporates musical knowledge. It ﬁrst extracts a melodic
                                skeleton of structurally important notes using music theory concepts such as
                                downbeats, accents and tonal tension. In the ﬁrst stage, a Transformer-XL net-
                                work is trained on the extracted melodic skeleton to generate new skeleton se-
                                quences. The second stage comprises a Transformer encoder-decoder model that
                                generates the full melody conditioned on encoding the skeleton to guide the
                                process. Experiments on the Wikifonia dataset and subsequent subjective evalu-
                                ations show WuYun produces melodies with improved structure and musicality
                                comparedto prior models including Pop Music Transformer [34] and Melons [80]
                                but still falls short with respect to the musical qualities of human compositions.
                12 K. Bhandari and S.Colton
                 AccoMontage [78] is a two step neuro-symbolic system for generating piano
                accompanimentsforcompletesongsgivenaleadsheetthatcomprisesthemelody
                and chord information of the complete song. AccoMontage combines rule-based
                optimization for high-level structure and deep learning for local coherence. The
                system ﬁrst retrieves candidate accompaniment phrases from a database using
                dynamic programming to optimize for good transitions and phrase-level ﬁt. It
                then re-harmonizes the retrieved phrases using neural style transfer to match the
                target chord progression of the template song. Subjective and objective evalu-
                ations show AccoMontage generates more coherent and well-structured accom-
                paniments compared to pure learning-based and template-matching baselines.
                However, the dependence on manual phrase level annotations in the dataset
                places constraints in the applicability of the model to other datasets.
                 The TeleMelody model in [36] applies a two-stage neuro-symbolic approach
                for lyric-to-melody generation. The ﬁrst stage trains a lyric-to-template model
                to generate the symbolic template from lyrics. The template design incorporates
                musical knowledge and rules revolving around musical elements such as tonality,
                chord progression, rhythm pattern, and cadence, providing a symbolic represen-
                tation that bridges lyrics and melodies. The second stage then trains a template-
                to-melody model in a self-supervised manner by extracting these templates from
                existing melodies and training a transformer model to reconstruct the melodies
                from the templates. Evaluations show TeleMelody generates melodies with bet-
                ter structure and musical attributes than previous end-to-end models with less
                requirement on paired training data. This is possible due to the intermediate
                template which helps reduce overall diﬃculty and improve data eﬃciency.
                 MeloForm[44]alsousesaneuro-symbolicapproachtogeneratemelodieswith
                musical form control by combining expert systems and neural networks. Melo-
                Form has two main components. First, an expert system generates synthetic
                melodies with a given musical form using handcrafted rules. It develops motifs
                into phrases and arranges phrases into sections with repetitions/variations based
                on the musical form. Second, a 4 layered transformer encoder-decoder network
                reﬁnes the synthetic melodies from the expert system to improve musical rich-
                ness without changing the form. The Transformer is trained on the Lakh MIDI
                Dataset [54] using an iterative masked sequence-to-sequence approach. During
                reﬁnement, it conditions on the adjacent phrase’s rhythm and harmony to pre-
                dict the pitch of masked phrases while preserving overall structure. The expert
                system provides ﬂexibility over musical form, while the neural network improves
                musical coherence. This allows MeloForm to support various musical forms such
                as verse-chorus, rondo, variational, sonata, etc. Subjective evaluations performed
                on MeloForm’s generated outputs show an improvement over Melons [80] in mu-
                sical structure, thematic material, melodic richness and overall quality.
                 Compose & Embellish [72] introduces another two-stage linear transformer
                based framework to generate piano performances with lead sheets as the in-
                termediate output. The authors extract the monophonic melodic line using the
                skyline algorithm from [64]. For structural information, the authors employ a
                structural analysis algorithm from [19] that utilizes edit similarity and the A*
                                                                              Motifs, Phrases, and Beyond      13
                                search to identify repetitive phrases within the composition. Notably, the ﬁrst
                                stage involves a pre-training strategy using a separate larger dataset (Lakh MIDI
                                Dataset [54]) for learning new lead sheets, setting it apart from the other two
                                stage models. The second stage ﬁne-tunes the lead sheet model and trains the
                                performancemodelusingthePop1K7dataset[31].Conditioningtheperformance
                                model on interleaved one-bar segments from the pre-trained lead sheet model en-
                                ables the generation of complete performance bars with contextual understand-
                                ing from the latest lead sheet bar.
                                5    Future Directions
                                Exploring Structural Encoding: While many music generation systems have
                                used bar level representations such as REMI [34,72] and REMI+ [56] for mod-
                                elling music with structure, incorporating phrase level representations or meta
                                data may be an interesting direction to explore. Recent work by [49] extends the
                                bar-level REMI encoding to incorporate phrase-level and bar countdown fea-
                                tures. Their model demonstrates the value of encoding pop musical structure
                                at the phrase level, aligning more closely with human music perception. How-
                                ever, phrase-based modelling and repetitive motif detection remains an open
                                challenge in algorithmic music generation and composition. One barrier is the
                                lack of standard practices or implementations for extracting musical phrases
                                and structural annotations across genres. Moving forward, the development of
                                robust tools to systematically extract and evaluate musical phrases across cor-
                                pora would provide the necessary components to assemble hierarchical phrase
                                structures, thereby enabling systems to construct forms at the phrase level. Ad-
                                ditional annotations demarcating phrase boundaries within datasets would also
                                facilitate progress in this area.
                                   Mastering Advanced Compositional Techniques: Developing sophis-
                                ticated long-term structure requires moving beyond basic repetitions and suc-
                                cessions. Current models such as [33] and [58] struggle with nuanced variations,
                                hindering the conveyance of complex musical narratives. Advancements demand
                                models to master musical development through compositional techniques such
                                as fragmentation, inversion, augmentation, diminution, stretto, sequence, and
                                modulation across various time frames. Learning how to manifest a motif across
                                the piece in a more structural way by incorporating such melodic and rhythmic
                                transformations may warrant for a similarity conscious generative framework in
                                which the generator understands how similar the last generated phrase is to the
                                initial motif, previous phrase and overall form and has the ability to go back
                                to reﬁne it. Building a pause-think-reﬁne framework along similar lines to [26]
                                would help research advance beyond sequential note-to-note generations that do
                                not explicitly model higher-level motivic structures and transformations.
                                   Integrated Neuro-Symbolic Approaches in Music Generation: Mu-
                                sic generation with long term structure is a complex endeavor that requires the
                                coordination of multiple components at the preprocessing stage. For example,
                                preprocessing data to extract melodic/rhythmic/phrase level features into mean-
                    14   K. Bhandari and S.Colton
                    ingful musical representations provides the groundwork for modelling music, as
                    seen in [44,58,72,76]. However, recent advances in music generation have not
                    yet eﬀectively integrated insights from symbolic methodologies and cognitive
                    musicology to achieve long-term structural coherence. While musical informa-
                    tion retrieval has actively researched structural analysis algorithms for decades
                    - spanning tempo estimation, key and modulation detection, cadence identiﬁ-
                    cation, and phrase similarity quantiﬁcation, etc. - modern neural approaches
                    surprisingly overlook these methods, opting for simplistic data preprocessing.
                    Furthermore, cognitive studies elucidating how humans internalize and antic-
                    ipate musical structure are imperative for designing evaluation protocols. Yet
                    current assessments of generative systems’ musicality, both objective and sub-
                    jective, lack foundations in perceptual research. Eﬀectively melding the method-
                    ological tools of symbolic analysis and lessons from music cognition remains an
                    open challenge in paving the way for a truly uniﬁed neuro-symbolic approach.
                      Top Down Structure: Sub-task decomposition studies in section 4 such
                    as [72,76,80] clearly demonstrate the viability of top-down hierarchical plan-
                    then-generate frameworks for algorithmic composition. By separating high-level
                    musical form construction from lower-level sequence generation, these two-stage
                    systems aimto improveglobalcoherence.Whileweexpectthis trendtocontinue,
                    we also hope to see studies that explore alternatives to the existing task break-
                    down involving pre-training, multi-task learning, unsupervised and contrastive
                    learning methods. What data, features, representations, learning strategies and
                    model architectures the sub-tasks consist of and how many stages of hierarchy
                    make the framework most eﬀective are questions worth looking into.
                    6  Conclusion
                    This literature review has charted elements of the evolution of modelling musi-
                    cal structure in AI-powered symbolic composition, from early symbolic systems
                    to contemporary deep learning techniques and subtask decomposition frame-
                    works. While progress is evident in capturing motifs, progressions, and global
                    forms, modelling nuanced development and variation of themes much like hu-
                    man compositions across extended periods remains challenging. Key future di-
                    rections involve moving beyond rigid structural units, integrating neuro-symbolic
                    approachesatvariousstagesinthesystem,andfurtherexploringtopdownstruc-
                    tures to shape musical narratives. Continued progress across complementary AI
                    techniques provides hope for achieving the creative development of themes reﬂec-
                    tive of human composers and musical culture, which may someday be attainable.
                    Acknowledgements
                    This work was supported by the UKRI and EPSRC under grant EP/S022694/1.
                    We gratefully acknowledge the use of generative AI in drafting and revising
                    certain sections of this literature review. Finally, we owe much appreciation to
                    our reviewers for their insightful critiques which greatly strengthened the work.
                                                                              Motifs, Phrases, and Beyond      15
                                References
                                 1. Alvarado, F.H.C., Lee, W.H., Huang, Y.H., Chen, Y.S.: Melody similarity and
                                    tempo diversity as evolutionary factors for music variations by genetic algorithms.
                                    In: 11th International Conference on Computational Creativity (ICCC). pp. 251–
                                    254 (2020)
                                 2. Amaral, G., Baﬀa, A., Briot, J.P., Feij´o, B., Furtado, A.: An adaptive music gen-
                                    eration architecture for games based on the deep learning transformer model. In:
                                    2022 21st Brazilian Symposium on Computer Games and Digital Entertainment
                                    (SBGames). pp. 1–6. IEEE (2022)
                                 3. Bahdanau, D., Cho, K., Bengio, Y.: Neural machine translation by jointly learning
                                    to align and translate. arXiv preprint arXiv:1409.0473 (2014)
                                 4. de Berardinis, J., Barrett, S., Cangelosi, A., Coutinho, E.: Modelling long-and
                                    short-term structure in symbolic music with attention and recurrence. In: Pro-
                                    ceedings of The 2020 Joint Conference on AI Music Creativity. pp. 1–11 (2020)
                                 5. Briot, J.P., Hadjeres, G., Pachet, F.D.: Deep learning techniques for music
                                    generation–a survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:1709.01620 (2017)
                                 6. Burns, G.: A typology of ‘hooks’ in popular records. Popular music 6(1), 1–20
                                    (1987)
                                 7. Carnovalini, F., Rod`a, A.: Computational creativity and music generation systems:
                                    An introduction to the state of the art. Frontiers in Artiﬁcial Intelligence 3, 14
                                    (2020)
                                 8. Chen, K., Zhang, W., Dubnov, S., Xia, G., Li, W.: The eﬀect of explicit structure
                                    encoding of deep neural networks for symbolic music generation. In: 2019 Inter-
                                    national Workshop on Multilayer Music Representation and Processing (MMRP).
                                    pp. 77–84. IEEE (2019)
                                 9. Chew, E., Chen, Y.C.: Real-time pitch spelling using the spiral array. Computer
                                    Music Journal 29(2), 61–76 (2005)
                                10. Child, R., Gray, S., Radford, A., Sutskever, I.: Generating long sequences with
                                    sparse transformers. arXiv preprint arXiv:1904.10509 (2019)
                                11. Christine, P.: MuseNet, https://openai.com/research/musenet
                                12. Civit, M., Civit-Masot, J., Cuadrado, F., Escalona, M.J.: A systematic review
                                    of artiﬁcial intelligence-based music generation: Scope, applications, and future
                                    trends. Expert Systems with Applications p. 118190 (2022)
                                13. Collins, T., Laney, R.: Computer-generated stylistic compositions with long-term
                                    repetitive and phrasal structure. Journal of Creative Music Systems 1(2) (2017)
                                14. Collins, T., Laney, R., Willis, A., Garthwaite, P.H.: Developing and evaluating
                                    computational models of musical style. AI EDAM 30(1), 16–43 (2016)
                                15. Collins, T., Thurlow, J., Laney, R.C., Willis, A., Garthwaite, P.H.: A comparative
                                    evaluation of algorithms for discovering translational patterns in baroque keyboard
                                    works. In: Downie, J.S., Veltkamp, R.C. (eds.) Proceedings of the 11th Interna-
                                    tional Society for Music Information Retrieval Conference, ISMIR. pp. 3–8 (2010),
                                    http://ismir2010.ismir.net/proceedings/ismir2010-2.pdf
                                16. Cont, A., Dubnov, S., Assayag, G.: Anticipatory model of musical style imitation
                                    using collaborative and competitive reinforcement learning. In: Workshop on An-
                                    ticipatory Behavior in Adaptive Learning Systems. pp. 285–306. Springer (2006)
                                17. Dai, S., Jin, Z., Gomes, C., Dannenberg, R.B.: Controllable deep melody generation
                                    via hierarchical music structure representation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2109.00663
                                    (2021)
                16 K. Bhandari and S.Colton
                18. Dai, S., Ma, X., Wang, Y., Dannenberg, R.B.: Personalised popular music gener-
                  ation using imitation and structure. Journal of New Music Research 51(1), 69–85
                  (2022)
                19. Dai, S., Zhang, H., Dannenberg, R.B.: Automatic analysis and inﬂuence of hierar-
                  chical structure on melody, rhythm and harmony in popular music. arXiv preprint
                  arXiv:2010.07518 (2020)
                20. Devlin,J., Chang, M.W.,Lee,K.,Toutanova,K.:Bert:Pre-trainingofdeepbidirec-
                  tional transformers for language understanding. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.04805
                  (2018)
                21. Donahue, C., Mao, H.H., Li, Y.E., Cottrell, G.W., McAuley, J.: Lakhnes: Im-
                  provingmulti-instrumental music generation with cross-domain pre-training. arXiv
                  preprint arXiv:1907.04868 (2019)
                22. Fitch, W.T., Rosenfeld, A.J.: Perception and production of syncopated rhythms.
                  Music Perception 25(1), 43–58 (2007)
                23. Frid, E., Gomes, C., Jin, Z.: Music creation by example. In: Proceedings of the
                  2020 CHI conference on human factors in computing systems. pp. 1–13 (2020)
                24. Gabrielsson, A.: The relationship between musical structure and perceived expres-
                  sion (2014)
                25. Herremans, D., Chew, E.: Tension ribbons: Quantifying and visualising tonal ten-
                  sion. In: Hoadley, R., Nash, C., Fober, D. (eds.) Proceedings of the International
                  Conference on Technologies for Music Notation and Representation – TENOR’16.
                  pp. 8–18
                26. Herremans, D., Chew, E.: Morpheus: generating structured music with constrained
                  patterns and tension. IEEE Transactions on Aﬀective Computing 10(4), 510–523
                  (2017)
                27. Herremans, D., Weisser, S., S¨orensen, K., Conklin, D.: Generating structured music
                  for bagana using quality metrics based on markov models. Expert Systems with
                  Applications 42(21), 7424–7435 (2015)
                28. Honing, H., et al.: Structure and interpretation of rhythm and timing. Tijdschrift
                  voor Muziektheorie 7(3), 227–232 (2002)
                29. H¨ornel, D.: Melonet i: Neural nets for inventing baroque-style chorale variations.
                  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 10 (1997)
                30. Hosna, A., Merry, E., Gyalmo, J., Alom, Z., Aung, Z., Azim, M.A.: Transfer learn-
                  ing: a friendly introduction. Journal of Big Data 9(1), 102 (2022)
                31. Hsiao, W.Y., Liu, J.Y., Yeh, Y.C., Yang, Y.H.: Compound word transformer:
                  Learning to compose full-song music over dynamic directed hypergraphs. In: Pro-
                  ceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence. vol. 35, pp. 178–186
                  (2021)
                32. Hu, Z., Ma, X., Liu, Y., Chen, G., Liu, Y.: The beauty of repetition in machine
                  composition scenarios. In: Proceedings of the 30th ACM International Conference
                  on Multimedia. pp. 1223–1231 (2022)
                33. Huang, C.Z.A., Vaswani, A., Uszkoreit, J., Shazeer, N., Simon, I., Hawthorne, C.,
                  Dai, A.M., Hoﬀman, M.D., Dinculescu, M., Eck, D.: Music transformer. arXiv
                  preprint arXiv:1809.04281 (2018)
                34. Huang, Y.S., Yang, Y.H.: Pop music transformer: Beat-based modeling and gen-
                  eration of expressive pop piano compositions. In: Proceedings of the 28th ACM
                  international conference on multimedia. pp. 1180–1188 (2020)
                35. Ji, S., Yang, X., Luo, J.: A survey on deep learning for symbolic music generation:
                  Representations, algorithms, evaluations, and challenges. ACM ComputingSurveys
                  (2023)
                                                                              Motifs, Phrases, and Beyond      17
                                36. Ju, Z., Lu, P., Tan, X., Wang, R., Zhang, C., Wu, S., Zhang, K., Li, X., Qin,
                                    T., Liu, T.Y.: Telemelody: Lyric-to-melody generation with a template-based two-
                                    stage method. arXiv preprint arXiv:2109.09617 (2021)
                                37. Krumhansl, C.L., Jusczyk, P.W.: Infants’ perception of phrase structure in music.
                                    Psychological science 1(1), 70–73 (1990)
                                38. Larsen, A.B.L., Sønderby, S.K., Larochelle, H., Winther, O.: Autoencoding beyond
                                    pixels using a learned similarity metric. In: International conference on machine
                                    learning. pp. 1558–1566. PMLR (2016)
                                39. Lazzari, N., Poltronieri, A., Presutti, V.: Pitchclass2vec: Symbolic music structure
                                    segmentation with chord embeddings. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.15306 (2023)
                                40. Li, S., Sung, Y.: Mrbert: Pre-training of melody and rhythm for automatic music
                                    generation. Mathematics 11(4), 798 (2023)
                                41. Liu, J., Dong, Y., Cheng, Z., Zhang, X., Li, X., Yu, F., Sun, M.: Symphony genera-
                                    tion with permutation invariant language model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.05448
                                    (2022)
                                42. Liu, W.: Literature survey of multi-track music generation model based on gener-
                                    ative confrontation network in intelligent composition. The Journal of Supercom-
                                    puting 79(6), 6560–6582 (2023)
                                43. Livingstone, S.R., Palmer, C., Schubert, E.: Emotional response to musical repe-
                                    tition 12(3), 552–567. https://doi.org/10.1037/a0023747
                                44. Lu, P., Tan, X., Yu, B., Qin, T., Zhao, S., Liu, T.Y.: Meloform: Generating melody
                                    with musical form based on expert systems and neural networks. arXiv preprint
                                    arXiv:2208.14345 (2022)
                                45. Makris, D., Zixun, G., Kaliakatsos-Papakostas, M., Herremans, D.: Condi-
                                    tional drums generation using compound word representations. In: Martins, T.,
                                    Rodr´ıguez-Fern´andez, N., Rebelo, S.M. (eds.) Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Music,
                                    Sound, Art and Design (EVOMUSART).pp.179–194. Springer International Pub-
                                    lishing, Cham (2022)
                                46. Medeot, G., Cherla, S., Kosta, K., McVicar, M., Abdallah, S., Selvi, M., Newton-
                                    Rex, E., Webster, K.: Structurenet: Inducing structure in generated melodies. In:
                                    International Society for Music Information Retrieval Conference (ISMIR). pp.
                                    725–731 (2018)
                                47. Meredith, D.: Cosiatec and siateccompress: Pattern discovery by geometric com-
                                    pression. In: International Society for Music Information Retrieval Conference (IS-
                                    MIR). ISMIR (2013)
                                48. Miller, G.A.: The magical number seven, plus or minus two: Some limits on our ca-
                                    pacity for processing information 63(2), 81–97. https://doi.org/10.1037/h0043158
                                49. Naruse, D., Takahata, T., Mukuta, Y., Harada, T.: Pop music generation with
                                    controllable phrase lengths. In: Proc. of the 23rd Int. Society for Music Information
                                    Retrieval Conf., Bengaluru, India (2022)
                                50. Ong, B.S., et al.: Structural analysis and segmentation of music signals. Citeseer
                                    (2006)
                                51. Oord, A.v.d., Dieleman, S., Zen, H., Simonyan, K., Vinyals, O., Graves, A., Kalch-
                                    brenner, N., Senior, A., Kavukcuoglu, K.: Wavenet: A generative model for raw
                                    audio. arXiv preprint arXiv:1609.03499 (2016)
                                52. Oore, S., Simon, I., Dieleman, S., Eck, D., Simonyan, K.: This time with feeling:
                                    Learning expressive musical performance. Neural Computing and Applications 32,
                                    955–967 (2020)
                                53. Pachet, F., Roy, P.: Markov constraints: steerable generation of markov sequences.
                                    Constraints 16, 148–172 (2011)
                                18      K. Bhandari and S.Colton
                                54. Raﬀel, C.: Learning-based methods for comparing sequences, with applications to
                                    audio-to-MIDI alignment and matching. https://doi.org/10.7916/D8N58MHV
                                55. Roberts, A., Engel, J., Raﬀel, C., Hawthorne, C., Eck, D.: A hierarchical latent
                                    vector model for learning long-term structure in music. In: International conference
                                    on machine learning. pp. 4364–4373. PMLR (2018)
                                56. von Ru¨tte, D., Biggio, L., Kilcher, Y., Hofmann, T.: Figaro: Generating symbolic
                                    music with ﬁne-grained artistic control. arXiv preprint arXiv:2201.10936 (2022)
                                57. Sheng, Z., Song, K., Tan, X., Ren, Y., Ye, W., Zhang, S., Qin, T.: Songmass: Au-
                                    tomatic song writing with pre-training and alignment constraint. In: Proceedings
                                    of the AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence. vol. 35, pp. 13798–13805 (2021)
                                58. Shih, Y.J., Wu, S.L., Zalkow, F., Muller, M., Yang, Y.H.: Theme transformer: Sym-
                                    bolic music generation with theme-conditioned transformer. IEEE Transactions on
                                    Multimedia (2022)
                                59. Stevens, C.J.: Music perception and cognition: A review of recent cross-cultural
                                    research. Topics in cognitive science 4(4), 653–667 (2012)
                                60. Tan, N., Aiello, R., Bever, T.G.: Harmonic structure as a determinant of melodic
                                    organization. Memory & Cognition 9(5), 533–539 (1981)
                                61. Tang, H., Gu, Y., Yang, X.: Music generation with ai technology: Is it possible? In:
                                    2022 IEEE 5th International Conference on Electronics Technology (ICET). pp.
                                    1265–1272. IEEE (2022)
                                62. Temperley, D.: The cognition of basic musical structures. MIT press (2004)
                                63. Ting, C.K., Wu, C.L., Liu, C.H.: A novel automatic composition system using
                                    evolutionary algorithm and phrase imitation. IEEE Systems Journal 11(3), 1284–
                                    1295 (2015)
                                64. Uitdenbogerd, A.L., Zobel, J.: Manipulation of music for melody matching. In:
                                    Proceedings of the sixth ACM International Conference on Multimedia. pp. 235–
                                    240 (1998)
                                65. Velardo, V., Vallati, M.: A planning-based approach for music composition.
                                    Springer (2015)
                                66. Waite,     E.,    Eck,    D,     Roberts,     A,    Abolaﬁa,     D:     Gen-
                                    erating     long-term       structure     in      songs      and      stories,
                                    https://magenta.tensorflow.org/2016/07/15/lookback-rnn-attention-rnn
                                67. Wang, Z., Xia, G.: Musebert: Pre-training music representation for music under-
                                    standing and controllable generation. In: International Society for Music Informa-
                                    tion Retrieval Conference (ISMIR). pp. 722–729 (2021)
                                68. Wei, I.C., Wu, C.W., Su, L.: Generating structured drum pattern using varia-
                                    tional autoencoder and self-similarity matrix. In: International Society for Music
                                    Information Retrieval Conference (ISMIR). pp. 847–854
                                69. Wigram, T., Gold, C.: Music therapy in the assessment and treatment of autistic
                                    spectrum disorder: clinical application and research evidence. Child: care, health
                                    and development 32(5), 535–542 (2006)
                                70. Wu, J., Hu, C., Wang, Y., Hu, X., Zhu, J.: A hierarchical recurrent neural network
                                    for symbolic melody generation. IEEE transactions on cybernetics 50(6), 2749–
                                    2757 (2019)
                                71. Wu, J., Liu, X., Hu, X., Zhu, J.: Popmnet: Generating structured pop music
                                    melodies using neural networks. Artiﬁcial Intelligence 286 (2020)
                                72. Wu, S.L., Yang, Y.H.: Compose & embellish: Well-structured piano performance
                                    generation via a two-stage approach, http://arxiv.org/abs/2209.08212
                                73. Wu, X., Huang, Z., Zhang, K., Yu, J., Tan, X., Zhang, T., Wang, Z., Sun, L.:
                                    Melodyglm:Multi-taskpre-trainingfor symbolicmelodygeneration. arXiv preprint
                                    arXiv:2309.10738 (2023)
                                                                              Motifs, Phrases, and Beyond      19
                                74. Yang, L.C., Chou, S.Y., Yang, Y.H.: Midinet: A convolutional generative adversar-
                                    ial network for symbolic-domain music generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1703.10847
                                    (2017)
                                75. Yu, B., Lu, P., Wang, R., Hu, W., Tan, X., Ye, W., Zhang, S., Qin, T., Liu,
                                    T.Y.: Museformer: Transformer with ﬁne-and coarse-grained attention for music
                                    generation. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 35, 1376–1388
                                    (2022)
                                76. Zhang, K., Wu, X., Zhang, T., Huang, Z., Tan, X., Liang, Q., Wu, S., Sun,
                                    L.: Wuyun: Exploring hierarchical skeleton-guided melody generation using
                                    knowledge-enhanced deep learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.04488 (2023)
                                77. Zhang, X., Zhang, J., Qiu, Y., Wang, L., Zhou, J.: Structure-enhanced pop music
                                    generation via harmony-aware learning. In: Proceedings of the 30th ACM Interna-
                                    tional Conference on Multimedia. pp. 1204–1213 (2022)
                                78. Zhao, J., Xia, G.: Accomontage: Accompaniment arrangement via phrase selection
                                    and style transfer. arXiv preprint arXiv:2108.11213 (2021)
                                79. Zixun, G., Makris, D., Herremans, D.: Hierarchical recurrent neural networks for
                                    conditional melody generation with long-term structure. In: 2021 International
                                    Joint Conference on Neural Networks (IJCNN). pp. 1–8. IEEE (2021)
                                80. Zou, Y., Zou, P., Zhao, Y., Zhang, K., Zhang, R., Wang, X.: Melons: generat-
                                    ing melody with long-term structure using transformers and structure graph. In:
                                    ICASSP2022-2022IEEEInternationalConferenceonAcoustics,SpeechandSignal
                                    Processing (ICASSP). pp. 191–195. IEEE (2022)
