                                  Museformer: Transformer with Fine- and
                             Coarse-Grained Attention for Music Generation
                                             вҖ              вҖЎ             вҖЎ          вҖ вҲ—           вҖЎвҲ—
                                     Botao Yu ,   Peiling Lu ,  RuiWang ,    WeiHu , XuTan ,
                                                В§                 В§           вҖЎ              вҖЎ
                                          WeiYe ,    ShikunZhang ,    TaoQin ,    Tie-Yan Liu
                                вҖ State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, China
                                                         вҖЎMicrosoft Research Asia
                            В§National Engineering Research Center for Software Engineering, Peking University, China
                                btyu@foxmail.com, {peil,ruiwa,xuta,taoqin,tyliu}@microsoft.com,
                                             whu@nju.edu.cn, {wye,zhangsk}@pku.edu.cn
                                                               Abstract
                                Symbolic music generation aims to generate music scores automatically. A recent
                                trend is to use Transformer or its variants in music generation, which is, how-
                                ever, suboptimal, because the full attention cannot efficiently model the typically
                                long music sequences (e.g., over 10,000 tokens), and the existing models have
                                shortcomings in generating musical repetition structures. In this paper, we pro-
                                pose Museformer, a Transformer with a novel fine- and coarse-grained attention
                                for music generation. Specifically, with the fine-grained attention, a token of a
                                specific bar directly attends to all the tokens of the bars that are most relevant
                                to music structures (e.g., the previous 1st, 2nd, 4th and 8th bars, selected via
                                similarity statistics); with the coarse-grained attention, a token only attends to the
                                summarization of the other bars rather than each token of them so as to reduce the
                                computational cost. The advantages are two-fold. First, it can capture both music
                                structure-related correlations via the fine-grained attention, and other contextual
                                information via the coarse-grained attention. Second, it is efficient and can model
                                over 3Г— longer music sequences compared to its full-attention counterpart. Both
                                objective and subjective experimental results demonstrate its ability to generate
                                                                                      1
                                long music sequences with high quality and better structures.
                        1   Introduction
                        Symbolic music generation aims at generating music scores automatically and has drawn more and
                        more attention in recent years [1вҖ“3]. Since music can be represented in organized sequences of
                        discrete tokens just like text, Transformer-based models, which have been demonstrated to work
                        well on text generation [4, 5], are increasingly applied in music generation [3, 6вҖ“11] and have made
                        great success. While the self-attention mechanism empowers Transformer to capture the complex
                        correlations in music, there are two ubiquitous challenges to solve for this task: 1) Long sequence
                        modeling. Music sequences are typically very long, especially for multi-instrument polyphonic music
                        where the lengths can usually exceed 10,000. The quadratic complexity of full attention limits its
                        scalability to that length. 2) Music structure modeling. Music has its unique structures, where a piece
                        can usually repeat some patterns of a previous piece, occasionally with some variations, after either a
                        short or a long distance (see Figure 1 for an example). Successfully generating reasonable structures
                        would make the music more realistic just like human-made music.
                           вҲ—WeiHuandXuTanarethecorrespondingauthors. This work was partially done while the first author was
                        interning at Microsoft Research Asia.
                           1The generated music samples can be found at https://ai-muzic.github.io/museformer. The source
                        code can be found at https://github.com/microsoft/muzic.
                        36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).
                                          оІҘ	=	120
                                       1                 2         3          4           5          6
                                          оӮ„
                                                                                                                  Tempo(120)  
                                                         оӮӨ оӮӨ
                                Synth.
                                          оӮ„
                                       оҒҗ           оӮӨ оӮӨ        оӮЈ                            оӮӨ оӮӨ
                                                                    оӮӨ оӮӨ
                                                                                                оӮӨ оӮӨ
                                                                         оӮӨ оӮӨ                          оӮӨ оӮӨ
                                                                               оӮӨ оӮӨ                         оӮЈ
                                             оӮӨ оӮӨ                                    оӮЈ
                                                                                                                  Beat(1)  Inst(Synth)  
                                                                                                                  Pitch(C4)  Dur(4th)  
                                                                                  оӮӨ                   оӮЈ    оӮЈ
                                       оҒў                 оӮЈ                     оӮӨ                оӮЈ
                                          оӮ„
                                                   оӮЈ          оӮЈ                     оӮӨ      оӮЈ
                                                                                                                  Vel(64)  Inst(Piano)  
                                                                    оӮЈ
                                             оӮЈ                           оӮЈ             оӮӨ
                                Piano
                                          оӮ„
                                      оҖҖ
                                                                                                                  Pitch(C3)  Dur(2th)  
                                                                                                                  Vel(58) 
                                      7               8          9            10        11          12
                                                                                                                  Beat(2)  Inst(Synth)  
                                                                               оӮӨ оӮӨ
                                Synth.
                                                                                                                  Pitch(C4)  Dur(4th)  
                                       оҒҗ оӮӨ оӮӨ                            оӮӨ оӮӨ         оӮЈ
                                                 оӮӨ оӮӨ
                                                                                         оӮӨ оӮӨ
                                                       оӮӨ оӮӨ                                     оӮӨ оӮӨ
                                                            оӮЈ
                                                                                                     оӮӨ оӮӨ
                                                                  оӮӨ оӮӨ                                     оӮЈ
                                                                                                                  Vel(64)  
                                                                                                                  ...
                                                       оӮЈ    оӮЈ                                           оӮӨ
                                       оҒў         оӮЈ                             оӮЈ                     оӮӨ
                                           оӮЈ                            оӮЈ           оӮЈ
                                                                                         оӮЈ
                                                                  оӮЈ                            оӮЈ          оӮЈ
                                                                                                                  Bar(end)
                                 Pno.
                                      оҖҖ
                               Figure 1: The music score of Twinkle, Twinkle, Little Star and its corresponding token representation.
                               EverytwoconsecutivebarsontheSynth. trackhavethesamerhythmicpattern,andthe9th-12thbars
                               repeat the 1st - 4th bars with an interval of 8 bars. Structures embodied as repetitions and variations
                               are common in music.
                               Although many Transformer variants in natural language processing (NLP) [12] have been proposed
                               to handle long sequences (the first challenge), they cannot well model the music structures (the
                               second challenge). According to the basic principles of these models, we can classify them into two
                               types. The first type is called local focusing. Models of this type, e.g., Transformer-XL [13] and
                               Longformer [14], mainly focus on part of the input sequence, and drop the rest tokens to reduce the
                               cost. However, the parts that they focus on cannot contain many of the essential ranges important to
                               musicstructures, and directly dropping the rest tokens may lead to losing some important information.
                               Thesecondtype is called global approximation. Models of this type such as Linear Transformer [15]
                               utilize linearized attention or sequence compression over the whole input sequence to approximate
                               the token pair-wise attention. While the approximation effectively reduces the complexity, they
                               cannot accurately capture the correlations between related parts and accordingly are inadequate in
                               generating repetition structures. We will review more existing long-sequence Transformers in В§2.
                               Directly applying these models to music generation is suboptimal, and it is desirable to design an
                               efficient model that can well model long music sequences as well as their structures.
                               In this paper, we propose to unify the above two types of models, which can well fit the characteristics
                               of music. Our motivation is based on the observation that the importance is not uniformly distributed
                               over the music sequence, and thus we do not need to treat all the tokens equally. Intuitively, to
                               generate music with repetition structures, the most important information the model should directly
                               refer to when generating a music bar, lies in those bars that tend to be repeated in the current bar.
                               Wecallthese bars structure-related bars. For the other bars that are less important, approximation
                               should do the trick. To this end, the proposed fine- and coarse-grained attention takes two different
                               schemes towards different bars: with the fine-grained attention, tokens of the structure-related bars
                               are directly attended to, to well learn the structure-related correlations; with the coarse-grained
                               attention, information of the other bars are captured via summarization [16], rather than attending
                               to each token of them, to decrease the computation and space complexity, and meanwhile retain
                               the necessary information of these bars. The structure-related bars are selected according to the
                               statistics on human-made music. They are not necessarily the most recent and consecutive bars but
                               can include distant ones, to cater to long-term structures in music. Our main contributions in this
                               paper are summarized as follows:
                               вҖў WeproposeMuseformer, a Transformer model with a novel fine- and coarse-grained attention for
                                  music generation. It captures the correlations of structure-related bars via fine-grained attention for
                                  learning the music structures, as well as the necessary and concentrated information of the other
                                  bars through their summarization via coarse-grained attention.
                               вҖў Wepropose to select the structure-related bars based on similarity statistics on human-made music,
                                  which can help decrease the perplexity and generate music that exhibits better structures.
                               вҖў The computation complexity and space complexity are reduced greatly to nearly linear in practice,
                                  which enables Museformer to scale up to long music sequences.
                               вҖў Experimental results show that Museformer can generate music of full-song length with high
                                  quality and better structures.
                                                                                       2
                           2   Related Work
                           2.1  Symbolic Music Generation
                           Symbolic music generation aims to exploit machines to compose music scores automatically. It has
                           been attracting more and more people to work on it, and the solutions continuously evolve from
                           rule-based models [1] to probabilistic models [17, 18, 2] to deep learning models [6вҖ“11].
                           In recent years, the Transformer-based models have achieved great success in many text generation
                           tasks [4, 5], thus have also been increasingly applied in the similar music generation tasks. Huang et al.
                           [3] apply Transformer in symbolic music generation for the first time and show that it can achieve
                           better performance compared to previous deep learning models such as recurrent neural networks.
                           While Transformer shows promising results in music generation, the quadratic complexity of the
                           attention mechanism limits its applications on the typically long music sequences. To resolve this
                           problem, researchers on symbolic music generation come up with different solutions. One popular
                           solution is to design a new representation method to represent musical information in fewer tokens,
                           such as compound word [19] and OctupleMIDI [20]. While this solution indeed decreases the lengths
                           of music sequences to a certain extent, full-song music sequences are still too long for Transformer to
                           handle. Another solution is to use a long-sequence Transformer variant as the backbone. For example,
                           HuangandYang[21]useTransformer-XL[13],andHsiaoetal.[19]useLinearTransformer[15].
                           Although these models can process long sequences, they are initially designed for NLP tasks and
                           cannot well model the music structures. We will introduce and discuss more about the long-sequence
                           Transformers in the following section.
                           2.2  Long-SequenceTransformers
                           ManyTransformer variants have been proposed to tackle long-sequence tasks [12], which in general
                           can be categorized into the following types. 1) Recurrent Transformer, which encodes sequences
                           chunk by chunk [13, 22, 23]. 2) Sparse attention, which sparsifies the attention layout with either
                           predefined patterns [14, 24, 25, 16, 26], or with content-based patterns [27вҖ“31]. 3) Linearized
                           attention, which replaces the exponent of the inner product of features with the multiplication of
                           feature maps [15, 32вҖ“34]. 4) Compression-based attention, which reduces the number of queries or
                           key-value pairs by compressing the contextual representations [35вҖ“37]. In addition, some models also
                           try to combine multiple techniques, such as Compressive Transformer [22] that combines recurrent
                           and compression-based methods, Poolingformer [36] and Transformer-LS [38] that combine sparse
                           attention and compression-based methods.
                           Existing works on music generation directly adopt some of those long-sequence Transformers to
                           process long music sequences, but it is suboptimal due to the unique structures of music. In general,
                           music has many repeating or similar pieces, many of which are distant from each other, and the
                           distance is measured by time units such as bar or beat instead of the number of tokens. Therefore, the
                           receptive fields of the existing recurrent Transformers or sparse attention methods cannot cover the
                           manyrangesofstructure-related content. Although the linearized or compression-based attention can
                           cover the whole sequence, they do not precisely capture the correlation between each pair of tokens
                           and may have shortcomings in generating repeating or similar music pieces.
                           3   Museformer
                           In order to well model long music sequences as well as their music structures, we propose Museformer.
                           Thegeneralideaisthatwedonotneedtofocusonthewholesequencewiththesameimportancelevel
                           given that the complexity of pair-wise full attention is unacceptably high, but instead we combine two
                           different attention schemes вҖ“ fine-grained attention for the structure-related bars, and coarse-grained
                           attention for the other bars. Museformer basically follows the original Transformer architecture [39],
                           and a novel fine- and coarse-grained attention (FC-Attention) is designed to replace the original
                           self-attention module to tackle the challenges in long music sequence modeling.
                           Museformertakes a music token sequence X = X ,...,X as input, where b denotes the number
                                                                            1        b
                           of music bars, and the i-th bar X = x   , . . . , x contains |X | tokens. For the i-th bar where
                                                           i     i,1      i,|Xi|           i
                           i = 1,...,b, we insert a summary token s after it to facilitate local information aggregation in
                                                                     i
                           FC-Attention. The summary token sequence is denoted by S = s1,...,sb. After the insertion, the
                                                                          3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     н өнұҘ     н өнұҘ     н өнұҘ            н өнұҘ     н өнұҘ            н өнұҘ     н өнұҘ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           н өнұ                    н өнұ                     н өнұ 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1,1    1,2     1,3           2,1    2,2           3,1    3,2
                                                                                  bar 1                                          bar 2                                   bar 3                                                              1                     2                    3
                                                                  xx          xx            xx            ss          xx           xx             ss          xx           xx             ss
                                                                    11,,11      11,,22        11,,33        11           22,,11       22,,22        22          33,,11       33,,22         33
                                                                  xx          xx            xx            ss          xx           xx             ss          xx           xx             ss
                                                                    11,,11      11,,22        11,,33        11           22,,11       22,,22        22          33,,11       33,,22         33
                                                                                                          ss                                      ss                                      ss
                                                                            вҖҰвҖҰ                              11            вҖҰвҖҰ                        22            вҖҰвҖҰ                        33
                                                             (a) Information flow. The dashed/solid lines depict the summariza-                                                                                 (b) Attention layouts. The bottom/top
                                                             tion/aggregation step. The dark lines represent the information flow                                                                                part corresponds to the summariza-
                                                             towards x                 .                                                                                                                         tion/aggregation step.
                                                                                 3,2
                                                             Figure 2: The fine- and coarse-grained attention. It shows a toy example of 3 bars, where for each
                                                             bar, only the previous 1st bar is regarded as the structure-related bar.
                                                             overall token sequence becomes X ,s В·В·В· ,X ,s . The embedding layer embeds the overall token
                                                                                                                                           1       1                  b      b
                                                             sequence into a vector space, and concatenates bar embeddings and beat embeddings as the positional
                                                             information [10], followed by a linear projection. The Museformer layers then model the contextual
                                                             representation, and the hidden state output by the last layer is fed into a softmax classifier to predict
                                                             the next token.
                                                             In the following part, we first give a brief formulation of the attention mechanism (В§3.1). Then, we
                                                             introduce the details of FC-Attention (В§3.2), followed by the selection of the structure-related bars
                                                             (В§3.3). Finally, we discuss the merits of Museformer (В§3.4).
                                                             3.1          Preliminary: Attention
                                                             Theattention mechanism [39] is the basis of FC-Attention. It receives two sequential inputs, namely
                                                                                              n Г—d                                      вҖІ            n Г—d
                                                             source X вҲҲ R src                              and target X вҲҲ R tgt                                  , where nsrc and ntgt are the sequence lengths of source
                                                             and target respectively, d is the embedding dimension. It computes contextual representation for each
                                                             xвҖІ вҲҲ R1Г—d in target XвҖІ as
                                                                 i
                                                                                                                                                                       вҖІ                                     T 
                                                                                                                                                                          x W (XW )
                                                                                                                                 вҖІ                                            i       QвҲҡ K
                                                                                                                 Attn(x ,X) = softmax                                                                                 XW ,                                                           (1)
                                                                                                                                 i                                                             d                                  V
                                                             where WQ,WK,WV вҲҲRdГ—darethetrainableparameters. Inpractice, we employ the multi-head
                                                             version of attention, but omit it from the equation for simplicity.
                                                             3.2          Fine- and Coarse-Grained Attention
                                                             Thebasic idea of FC-Attention is that, instead of directly attending to all the tokens which causes the
                                                             quadratic complexity, a token of a specific bar only directly attends to the structure-related bars that
                                                             are essential for generating structured music (fine-grained attention), and for the other bars, the token
                                                             only attends to their summary tokens to obtain concentrated information (coarse-grained attention).
                                                             Toachieve this, we first summarize the local information of each bar through the summarization step,
                                                             and then aggregate the fine-grained and coarse-grained information through the aggregation step.
                                                             Figure 2 visualizes the process.
                                                             Summarization In the summarization step, we aggregate the information of each bar into the
                                                             correspondingsummarytoken. Forthei-thbar,giventherepresentationofsummarytokens вҲҲ R1Г—d,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     i
                                                                                                                                                                                              |X |Г—d
                                                             and that of the music tokens X = [x                                                      , . . . , x                 ] вҲҲ R            i        , the summarization of this bar is
                                                                                                                                  i              i,1                   i,|Xi|
                                                                                                                                                  Лң                                                
                                                                                                                                                 s =Attn s ,[X ,s ] ,                                                                                                                (2)
                                                                                                                                                    i                        i          i      i
                                                             whereAttn(В·) is defined in Equation (1), [В·] is the concatenation operation. In this step, each summary
                                                             token attends to music tokens of its corresponding bar as well as the summary token itself.
                                                                                                                                                                           4
                                            14
                                            12
                                            10
                                              8
                                              6
                                           Similarity (%)4
                                              2
                                              0 0            4            8           12           16           20            24           28           32           36           40
                                                                                                            Interval (bar)
                                        Figure 3: The similarity distribution of the training set used in our experiments. It is calculated over
                                        the melody track because melody best shows the structure of a song. We omit the similarity when
                                        t = 0 because the similarity between a bar and itself is always 1.0.
                                        Aggregation           In the aggregation step, we aggregate the information of the tokens belonging to the
                                        structure-related bars or within the current bar, as well as the summarization of the other bars, so as
                                        to update the contextual representations of music tokens. The updated representation for xi,j is
                                                                                Лң                                                 Лң        
                                                                                xi,j = Attn xi,j,[XR(i),Xi,kвүӨj,SВҜ                          ]  ,                                    (3)
                                                                                                                                     R(i)
                                                                                                                                                                              ВҜ
                                        whereR(i)isthesetoftheindicesofthestructure-relatedbarswithrespecttothei-thbar, andR(i)is
                                        the set of the indices of other previous bars. X                         is the matrix formed by stacking {X |i вҲҲ R(i)}.
                                                                                                           R(i)                                                      i
                                                        Лң                                                          Лң           ВҜ
                                        Similarly, SВҜ           is the matrix formed by stacking {s |i вҲҲ R(i)}. X                                    is the matrix formed by
                                                          R(i)                                                       i                      i,kвүӨj
                                        stacking {x          | x      вҲҲX,kвүӨj}.Inotherwords,themusictokenx                                        only attends to those music
                                                         i,k     i,k        i                                                               i,j
                                        tokens that belong to the structure-related bars, and its previous tokens within the current bar. For the
                                        other bars, it only attends to their summary tokens.
                                        3.3     Structure-Related Bar Selection
                                        Considering that the structure-related bars are expected to contain those bars that are most likely to
                                        be repeated by the current bar to be generated, we propose to pinpoint them by similarity statistics,
                                        and the bars with high similarities should be selected. Specifically, for each song in the training set,
                                        wecalculate the similarity between each pair of the bars, which is defined as
                                                                                               l     = |N(i)вҲ©N(j)|,                                                                (4)
                                                                                                i,j      |N(i)вҲӘN(j)|
                                        where N(i) is the set of music notes within the i-th bar, and two notes are considered equal when
                                        their pitches, duration, and onset positions within their bars are all the same. The value of l                                       ranges
                                                                                                                                                                          i,j
                                        from 0.0 to 1.0. If two bars are exactly the same, this value equals 1.0. We then calculate the average
                                        similarity of those bar pairs whose intervals are t over the training set D, which is formulated as
                                                                                            L =Mean(X X l ).                                                                       (5)
                                                                                              t                              i,j
                                                                                                               D j=i+t
                                        In this paper, we call the distribution of the similarity with respect to the bar intervals the similarity
                                        distribution, and show that of the training data in Figure 3. As we can see, it shows an obvious
                                        periodical pattern вҖ“ a music bar tends to be more similar to its previous 2 bars, and also to the previous
                                        4-th bar or its multipliers in most cases. We further conduct the similarity statistics on different
                                        datasets involving music of various genres and styles. The results shown in Appendix A interestingly
                                        indicate that this pattern is universally applicable to the music of the great diversity. We believe that
                                        it can be regarded as a general rule applicable to most music in our daily life.
                                        Based on the statistical results, we carefully select 8 bars вҖ“ the previous 1st, 2nd, 4th, 8th, 12th, 16th,
                                        24th, and 32nd bars, as the default structured-related bars, since they can cover the most similar bars
                                        in most cases. The number of selected structure-related bars is a trade-off between efficiency and
                                        information richness. One can select more or other bars according to the computation resources and
                                                                                                               5
                           the specific similarity distribution of the used dataset. We have to admit that the selected bars cannot
                           always cater to any song, but as long as it covers most cases, it can already enable Museformer to
                           generate music with better structures.
                           3.4  Merits of Museformer
                           Weexplain why Museformer is suitable for the music generation task.
                           First, the receptive fields of the fine-grained attention comply with the characteristics of music and can
                           cover most of the structure-related information. Unlike previous models that adopt fixed token-level
                           patterns [14, 38] or learn content-based patterns [27, 31], which may not cover the most important
                           ranges to be referred to for generating music structures, we directly use the structure-related bars
                           derived from human-made music. These bars can include both neighboring ones and distant ones,
                           which enables Museformer to generate both short-term and long-term music structures.
                           Second, the coarse-grained attention can preserve necessary information for generating better music.
                           In general, FC-Attention can be categorized into sparse attention, but unlike conventional sparse
                           attention that simply drops a large amount of information, which may limit the modelвҖҷs capability,
                           especially for music where mutual connections abound, the coarse-grained attention preserves the
                           information of the other bars so as to provide rich clues for generation.
                           Third, the combination of the fine- and coarse-grained attention enables Museformer to handle long
                           music sequences efficiently. Compared to the number of all the music tokens, the number of tokens
                           in the structure-related bars and the summary tokens is much smaller, so the memory consumption
                           and the running time are greatly reduced. It is essential for this task where sequences are quite long.
                           4   Experiments
                           4.1  ExperimentSettings
                           Wegiveabriefintroduction to the experiment settings. Please refer to Appendix B for more details.
                           Dataset and Music Representation     Weconductourexperiments on the widely used Lakh MIDI
                           (LMD)dataset [40], which contains multi-instrument music in the format of MIDI. After preprocess-
                           ing, the final dataset contains 29,940 songs (1,727 hours), each song contains 95 bars on average.
                           Following [10], various instruments are merged into the 6 basic ones namely square synthesizer,
                           piano, guitar, string, bass, and drum, with the square synthesizer playing the melody. We use a
                           REMI-like representation method [21] to transfer MIDIs into token sequences, where the musical
                           information (instrument, bar line, note position, pitch, duration, etc.) is represented in separate
                           tokens (see Figure 1 for an example). Each song is represented by 15,042 tokens on average, and
                           each bar is represented by 158 tokens on average. We randomly split all the songs by 8/1/1 for
                           training/validation/test, respectively.
                           Implementation    Museformer is implemented with PyTorch2 and fairseq3. For the efficient compu-
                           tation of FC-Attention, we write CUDA kernels to construct the attention layouts for each sample,
                           and then transfer the layouts into a blocksparse form and compute with SparTA4 [41].
                           ModelandTrainingConfigurations ThecoreparametersofMuseformerincludelayernumber
                           =4, hidden size = 512, number of attention heads = 8, and FFN hidden size = 2,048. During
                           training, the batch size is set to 4 songs. Following [39], we use the Adam optimizer with ОІ1 = 0.9,
                                                вҲ’9
                           ОІ2 = 0.98 and Оө = 10    , and the learning rate is warmed up over the first 16,000 steps linearly to
                                                 вҲ’4
                           a peak value of 5 Г— 10   , and then decreases based on the inverse square root of the steps. The
                           L2weight decay is set to 0.01. During inference, we use top-k sampling with k = 8. Generation
                           continues until the end-of-sentence token is generated or it reaches the maximum length of 20,480.
                              2https://pytorch.org
                              3https://github.com/pytorch/fairseq
                              4https://github.com/microsoft/SparTA
                                                                          6
                         ComparedModels WecompareMuseformerwith 4 representative Transformer-based models,
                         most of which have been adopted in music generation:
                         вҖў MusicTransformer[3]: avanillaTransformerwithamemory-efficientвҖңskewingвҖқrelativeposition
                           embedding implementation.
                         вҖў Transformer-XL [13]: a recurrent Transformer that encodes the sequence chunk by chunk and
                           uses the gradient-stopped representations of previous chunks as the memory.
                         вҖў Longformer[14]: a model with a sliding window sparse attention.
                         вҖў Linear Transformer [15]: a model that uses a kernel-based attention of linear complexity.
                         All the compared models are set with comparable hyper-parameters as Museformer. For Music
                         Transformer that uses the full attention and thus cannot model long sequences at once due to memory
                         limit, we chunk each song into multiple samples during training, and apply the model to generate
                         long sequences during validation and inference to test its generalization on long music sequences.
                         Objective Evaluation  Weusethefollowing objective metrics to evaluate the models:
                         вҖў Perplexity (PPL): a common metric to measure whether a generative model can correctly predict
                           future tokens. The smaller, the better. To see the modelsвҖҷ performances on different lengths, it is
                           calculated on the first 1,024, 5,120, or 10,240 tokens of each sample.
                         вҖў Similarity Error (SE): the error between the similarity distribution of training data and generated
                           music, to evaluate the modelsвҖҷ ability to generate music with realistic structures. It is defined as
                                                                     T
                                                                  1 X ЛҶ
                                                            SE= T      |Lt вҲ’Lt|,                               (6)
                                                                    t=1
                                 ЛҶ
                          where Lt and Lt are the average similarities (defined in Equation (5)) of the generated music and
                                                                                            ЛҶ
                           the training data respectively. We set T = 40 in our experiments, and Lt is calculated on 100
                           generated music pieces for each model. The smaller the value is, the more similar the structures of
                           the generated music are to human-made music.
                         Subjective Evaluation Themostcanonical way to evaluate a music generation model is the human
                         listening test. We apply each model to randomly generate 100 music pieces, and invite 10 people,
                         where 7 of them have music-related learning experiences, to score these music pieces. Specifically,
                         for each participant, we randomly construct 5 groups, where each group contains 5 music pieces that
                         are generated by Museformer and the 4 compared models, respectively. Participants are asked to
                         score these music pieces from 1 (lowest) to 10 (highest) over the following subjective metrics:
                         вҖў Musicality: whether it is pleasant and interesting, and real enough just like human-made music.
                         вҖў Short-term structure: whether it shows good structures in neighboring content, such as good
                           repetitions and reasonable development.
                         вҖў Long-term structure: whether it shows good structures in long distances, such as song-level
                           repetitions and long-distance connections.
                         вҖў Overall: an overall score. We also calculate preference score based on this overall score, which is
                           defined as the ratio of winning times (obtaining the highest overall score within a group).
                         4.2  ComparisonwithPreviousModels
                         Table 1 shows the results of the objective evaluation. As we can see: 1) Music Transformer achieves
                         a comparable PPL as other models on short music sequences (1,024 tokens) but undergoes a severe
                         deterioration on longer sequences, which implies that a model trained on short music sequences cannot
                         well generalize to long music sequences. Accordingly, an appropriate long-sequence Transformer
                         modelis needed for modeling the long music sequences. 2) Although the receptive field of Linear
                         Transformer can cover the whole sequence, its PPLs show no superiority compared to other models,
                         which may be because the kernel-based attention cannot accurately capture the complex correlations
                         of music. 3) The proposed Museformer can consistently achieve the best PPLs on various sequence
                         lengths, especially on a larger length, which demonstrates the effectiveness of Museformer on the
                                                                    7
                         Table 1: The results of objective evaluation and ablation study. The numbers in the parentheses for
                          PPLsaresequence lengths.
                                                          PPL(1,024)    PPL(5,120)    PPL(10,240)    SE(%)
                                   Music Transformer         1.66          1.77           2.55         2.49
                                   Transformer-XL            1.64          1.45           1.43        15.66
                                   Longformer                1.65          1.46           1.45         5.25
                                   Linear Transformer        1.86          1.67           1.64         1.97
                                   Museformer (ours)         1.64          1.41           1.35        0.95
                                     w/ocoarse-grained       1.65          1.42           1.38         1.08
                                     w/obarselection         1.65          1.43           1.39         6.39
                         Table 2: The results of subjective evaluation. ST and LT stand for short-term and long-term re-
                          spectively. For all the subjective metrics, mean Вұ standard deviation is reported. Pref stands for
                          preference score.
                                                   Musicality    STstructure    LTstructure      Overall      Pref
                             Music Transformer    6.00Вұ2.21      6.90Вұ1.76      5.30Вұ2.58      5.90 Вұ1.90     0.20
                             Transformer-XL       6.10Вұ2.19      7.40Вұ1.81      6.26Вұ2.78      6.44 Вұ2.01     0.34
                             Longformer           6.46Вұ1.81      7.60Вұ1.47      6.18Вұ2.54      6.44 Вұ1.72     0.24
                             Linear Transformer   6.06Вұ1.99      6.92Вұ2.03      5.78Вұ2.64      6.30Вұ1.84      0.24
                             Museformer (ours)    6.88Вұ1.95      7.86Вұ1.51      6.72Вұ2.74     7.12Вұ1.81      0.46
                          music generation task. 4) The results on SE demonstrate that the music generated by Museformer has
                          structures that are most similar to the human-made music. We provide the similarity distribution for
                          each model and more discussion in Appendix C.
                          Furthermore, we present the results of the subjective evaluation in Table 2, which show that Muse-
                          former achieves the best performance. Specifically, 1) Museformer gets the highest scores on all the
                          metrics. 2) On the structure-related metrics, especially the long-term structure, Museformer exceeds
                          other models by a large gap, indicating that the proposed FC-Attention can empower the model to
                          capture the correlations in distant bars.
                         Wefurther do pairwise comparisons over the subjective evaluation results. Table 3 shows the number
                          of wins/ties/losses based on the overall scores, as well as the p-values of the Wilcoxon signed rank test.
                          Museformerobtains more wins than the compared models, and the p-values indicate that Museformer
                          achieves statistically significant improvements (p < 0.05).
                          4.3  Ablation Study
                         Weverify the effectiveness of the Museformer components as follows: 1) To see the effectiveness of
                          the coarse-grained attention, we compare Museformer with the setting w/o coarse-grained, where
                          each music token attends to the music tokens in the structure-related bars and its previous ones in the
                          current bars, and no summary token of any bar. 2) To see the effectiveness of the structure-related bar
                                 Table 3: The results of pairwise comparisons based on the subjective overall scores.
                                                                           Wins   Ties   Losses   p-value
                                      Museformer VS Music Transformer       33      7      10     0.0003
                                      Museformer VS Transformer-XL          25     14      11     0.0375
                                      Museformer VS Longformer              28      8      14     0.0424
                                      Museformer VS Linear Transformer      29      7      14     0.0128
                                                                       8
                                             32                                                                         30
                                             28                                                                         25
                                             24
                                             20                                                                         20
                                             16                                                                         15
                                             12                                                                         10
                                           GPU memory (GB)8                                    Full Attention                                                             Full Attention
                                              4                                                FC-Attention            Time per iteration (1e-2 s)5                       FC-Attention
                                              0 0    4096 8192 12288 16384 20480 24576 28672 32768 36864                 0 0    4096 8192 12288 16384 20480 24576 28672 32768 36864
                                                                  Maximum sequence length                                                    Maximum sequence length
                                                        (a) GPU memory consumption.                                                 (b) Running time per iteration.
                                         Figure 4: Memory consumption and running time of Museformer with FC-Attention compared to its
                                         full attention counterpart.
                                         selection for the fine-grained attention, we compare Museformer with the setting w/o bar selection,
                                         where we use the most recent 8 bars for the fine-grained attention instead of the structure-related bars
                                         selected via the similarity statistics.
                                         From the results presented in the bottom block of Table 1, we can observe that: 1) Museformer
                                         consistently achieves better performances on both PPLs and SE compared to the two ablation settings,
                                         which demonstrates the effectiveness of the coarse-grained attention and the structure-related bar
                                         selection. 2) The coarse-grained attention preserves the necessary information of the bars other than
                                         the structured-related bars and can consistently help decrease the PPLs. 3) The contribution of the
                                         structure-related bar selection increases as the sequences get longer. This is reasonable because
                                         that in a longer music sequence, there tends to be more bars and more long-term structures, and
                                         the fine-grained attention can directly capture the correlations in the distant structure-related bars,
                                         which helps make more accurate predictions. 4) Embodied on SE, the bar selection is contributory to
                                         the structures of generated music. Please refer to Appendix C for more details. In addition to the
                                         above two settings, we have also tried disabling the fine-grained attention for previous bars, where a
                                         music token only directly attends to its previous tokens within its bar and attends to all the previous
                                         bars via the summary tokens. The result indicates that only summarized information and no precise
                                         token-level information for the previous bars is insufficient for the model to generate coherent music.
                                         4.4     Complexity Analysis
                                         Suppose the sequence length is n, the average bar number is b, the average bar length is m, and
                                         the number of selected structure-related bars is k. For FC-Attention, the time complexity of the
                                         summarization step is O(n), and that of the aggregation step is O (km + b)n, so the overall
                                         complexity is O (km+b)n = O (km+n/m)n. Althoughthecomplexityisstill proportional to
                                         the square of n, the typically large divider m (mostly exceeds 100) greatly reduces the complexity.
                                         Thus, the specific complexity is between linear and quadratic. Note that the computation of FC-
                                         Attention depends on the input content, i.e., the number of bars and the number of tokens in each
                                         individual bar, the complexity cannot be precisely formulated, and the efficiency in real applications
                                         is more noteworthy.
                                         Toseetheefficiency of FC-Attention in real applications, we train Museformer and its full attention
                                         counterpart on the validation set, and record their memory consumption and running time. With batch
                                         size = 1, we increase the maximum sequence length until we use up the 32GB memory of an Nvidia
                                         V100GPU,andrecordthepeakmemoryconsumption5 andtherunningtimeforone-epochtraining.
                                         Figure 4 shows the results. We observe that the memory consumption of Museformer increases at
                                         a nearly linear rate with respect to the maximum sequence length, and can process over 3Г— longer
                                         music sequences than its full attention counterpart, making it capable of generating full-song music.
                                         Museformeralso achieves faster training time when the maximum sequence length is greater than
                                         around 5,000, which is common for music sequences.
                                             5Obtained by torch.cuda.max_memory_allocated().
                                                                                                                  9
                              4.5   CaseStudy
                              Figure 5 shows a snippet of a song generated by Museformer. As we can see, on the Strings track, the
                              13th - 16th bars repeat the 9th - 12th bars with an interval of 4 bars, which is a short-term structure.
                              The25th-32ndbarsrepeatthe9th-16thbarswithaninterval of 16 bars, and there are reasonable
                              variations in the 27th bar compared to the 11th bar, which shows a long-term structure. This case
                              demonstrates that Museformer can generate music with both short-term and long-term structures,
                              and not only exact repetitions but also some variations. In addition to the two exhibited tracks, other
                              tracks, such as piano and drum, have more variations on the two similar segments, which creates
                              reasonable development of music. Please refer to our demo page for more information.
                                             9         10             11         12      13          14      15         16
                                                  оӮЈ                            оүҖ           оӮӨ                          оүҖ
                                                        оӮӨ                                      оӮӨ      оӮӨ                       оӮЈ
                                       Synth.
                                             оҒҗ      оӮЈ                             оӮӨ          оӮӨ   оӮЈ                        оӮӨ
                                                                                               о’Ј
                                                           оӮӨ                        оӮӨ оӮЈ                 оӮӨ                   оӮӨ
                                                                        оӮЈ                       оӮӨ               оӮЈ
                                                             оӮӨ             оӮӨоҮ§                                      оӮӨоҮ§
                                                              оӮӨ оӮӨ оӮӨ           оӮӨ                           оӮЈ          оӮӨ
                                                        оӮў                                             оӮў
                                                  оӮў                     оӮў                  оӮў                   оӮў
                                                                       оӮў                                      оӮў
                                                  оӮў     оӮў                         оӮў        оӮў          оӮў                   оӮў
                                                                        оӮў                                      оӮў
                                                        оӮў                         оӮў                   оӮў                   оӮў
                                                  оӮў                                        оӮў
                                             оҒў                                    оӮў                                       оӮў
                                                  оӮў                                        оӮў
                                      Strings
                                                                        оӮў                                      оӮў
                                                        оӮў                         оӮў                   оӮў                   оӮў
                                                                                 вҖҰвҖҰ
                                             25        26            27            28      29         30      31         32
                                                                           оүҖ
                                                  оӮЈ                              оүҖ           оӮӨ                         оүҖ
                                                        оӮӨ                                       оӮӨ      оӮӨ                      оӮЈ
                                       Synth.
                                             оҒҗ      оӮЈ                                оӮӨ         оӮӨ   оӮЈ                      оӮӨ
                                                                                                 о’Ј
                                                           оӮӨ             оҮ§            оӮӨ оӮЈ                оӮӨ                  оӮӨ
                                                                       оӮӨ  оӮӨ                       оӮӨ             оӮЈ
                                                            оӮӨ                оӮӨоҮ§                                    оӮӨоҮ§
                                                              оӮӨ оӮӨ оӮӨ             оӮӨ                          оӮЈ          оӮӨ
                                                        оӮў                                              оӮў
                                                  оӮў                    оӮў                    оӮў                   оӮў
                                                                      оӮў                                        оӮў
                                                  оӮў     оӮў                            оӮў      оӮў          оӮў                  оӮў
                                                                       оӮў                                        оӮў
                                                        оӮў                            оӮў                 оӮў                  оӮў
                                                  оӮў                                         оӮў
                                             оҒў                                       оӮў                                    оӮў
                                                  оӮў                                         оӮў
                                      Strings
                                                                       оӮў                                        оӮў
                                                        оӮў                            оӮў                 оӮў                  оӮў
                                                              Figure 5: A snippet of a generated song.
                              5    Conclusion
                              Tosolve the long sequence modeling and music structure modeling challenges in symbolic music
                              generation, we propose Museformer with a novel fine- and coarse-grained attention. The fine-grained
                              attention is applied to the structure-related bars for learning the structure-related correlations, and the
                              coarse-grained attention is applied to the summarization of the other bars for getting a sketch of them.
                              Weproposetoselect the structure-related bars via bar-pair similarity statistics. Experimental results
                              showthat Museformer is efficient and can generate music with good quality and structures.
                              Museformer is not perfect yet, and we would like to discuss about its limitations and possible
                              future explorations. First, since Museformer takes random samplings during inference and does not
                              receive manual control, it can hardly ensure that every generated music piece is well-structured in
                              an expected way. Techniques to enhance its reliability and controllability can be further explored.
                              Furthermore, the musicality and the creativity of the generated music are still behind those of human-
                              made music, which remains a problem for all the existing music generation models. We believe
                              that more sophisticated music representation and large models trained on large-scale data can help
                              alleviate this problem. Finally, we anticipate MuseformerвҖҷs adaptation to more tasks and domains.
                              It can be easily and reasonably applied to music understanding tasks. For NLP tasks, since natural
                              languages do not have the periodical patterns as music, how to determine the semantically related
                              sentences, paragraphs, or documents is an interesting challenge to solve.
                              Acknowledgments
                              This work is supported by National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 61872172). We thank
                              the scorers in the subjective evaluation, the SparTA group at Microsoft Research Asia, and many
                              other people from the Websoft group at Nanjing University and Microsoft for their kind help.
                              References
                               [1] H. A. G. Salas, A. F. Gelbukh, H. Calvo, and F. G. Soria, вҖңAutomatic music composition with
                                    simple probabilistic generative grammars,вҖқ Polibits, vol. 44, pp. 59вҖ“65, 2011.
                               [2] A. K. Yanchenko and S. Mukherjee, вҖңClassical music composition using state space models,вҖқ
                                    arXiv preprint arXiv:1708.03822, 2017.
                                                                                  10
            [3] C.-Z. A. Huang, A. Vaswani, J. Uszkoreit, I. Simon, C. Hawthorne, N. Shazeer, A. M. Dai, M. D.
              Hoffman, M. Dinculescu, and D. Eck, вҖңMusic transformer: Generating music with long-term
              structure,вҖқ in Proceedings of International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR),
              2018.
            [4] A.Radford,K.Narasimhan,T.Salimans,I.Sutskeveretal.,вҖңImprovinglanguageunderstanding
              bygenerative pre-training,вҖқ OpenAI, 2018.
            [5] J. Li, T. Tang, W. X. Zhao, and J.-R. Wen, вҖңPretrained language model for text generation: A
              survey,вҖқ in Proceedings of International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence (IJCAI),
              2021, pp. 4492вҖ“4499.
            [6] C. Donahue, H. H. Mao, Y. E. Li, G. W. Cottrell, and J. J. McAuley, вҖңLakhnes: Improving multi-
              instrumental music generation with cross-domain pre-training,вҖқ in Proceedings of International
              Society for Music Information Retrieval Conference (ISMIR), 2019, pp. 685вҖ“692.
            [7] A. Muhamed, L. Li, X. Shi, S. Yaddanapudi, W. Chi, D. Jackson, R. Suresh, Z. C. Lipton, and
              A. J. Smola, вҖңSymbolic music generation with transformer-gans,вҖқ in Proceedings of the AAAI
              Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI), vol. 35, 2021, pp. 408вҖ“417.
            [8] A. Roberts, J. Engel, C. Raffel, C. Hawthorne, and D. Eck, вҖңA hierarchical latent vector model
              for learning long-term structure in music,вҖқ in Proceedings of International Conference on
              Machine Learning (ICML), vol. 80, 2018, pp. 4364вҖ“4373.
            [9] Z. Ju, P. Lu, X. Tan, R. Wang, C. Zhang, S. Wu, K. Zhang, X. Li, T. Qin, and T.-Y. Liu,
             вҖңTelemelody: Lyric-to-melody generation with a template-based two-stage method,вҖқ arXiv
              preprint arXiv:2109.09617, 2021.
           [10] Y. Ren, J. He, X. Tan, T. Qin, Z. Zhao, and T.-Y. Liu, вҖңPopmag: Pop music accompaniment
              generation,вҖқ in Proceedings of ACM International Conference on Multimedia (MM), 2020, pp.
              1198вҖ“1206.
           [11] Z. Sheng, K. Song, X. Tan, Y. Ren, W. Ye, S. Zhang, and T. Qin, вҖңSongmass: Automatic song
              writing with pre-training and alignment constraint,вҖқ in Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on
              Artificial Intelligence (AAAI), 2021, pp. 13798вҖ“13805.
           [12] T. Lin, Y. Wang, X. Liu, and X. Qiu, вҖңA survey of transformers,вҖқ arXiv preprint
              arXiv:2106.04554, 2021.
           [13] Z.Dai,Z.Yang,Y.Yang,J.Carbonell,Q.Le,andR.Salakhutdinov,вҖңTransformer-XL:Attentive
              language models beyond a fixed-length context,вҖқ in Proceedings of Annual Meeting of the
              Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL), 2019, pp. 2978вҖ“2988.
           [14] I. Beltagy, M. E. Peters, and A. Cohan, вҖңLongformer: The long-document transformer,вҖқ arXiv
              preprint arXiv:2004.05150, 2020.
           [15] A. Katharopoulos, A. Vyas, N. Pappas, and F. Fleuret, вҖңTransformers are RNNs: Fast autore-
              gressive transformers with linear attention,вҖқ in Proceedings of International Conference on
              Machine Learning (ICML), 2020, pp. 5156вҖ“5165.
           [16] Z. Ye, Q. Guo, Q. Gan, X. Qiu, and Z. Zhang, вҖңBp-transformer: Modelling long-range context
              via binary partitioning,вҖқ arXiv preprint arXiv:1911.04070, 2019.
           [17] M. M. Farbood and B. SchГ¶ner, вҖңAnalysis and synthesis of palestrina-style counterpoint using
              markovchains,вҖқ in Proceedings of International Computer Music Conference (ICMC), 2001.
           [18] M. Allan, вҖңHarmonising chorales in the style of johann sebastian bach,вҖқ MasterвҖҷs, 2002.
           [19] W.-Y. Hsiao, J.-Y. Liu, Y.-C. Yeh, and Y.-H. Yang, вҖңCompound word transformer: Learning
              to compose full-song music over dynamic directed hypergraphs,вҖқ in Proceedings of the AAAI
              Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI), vol. 35, 2021, pp. 178вҖ“186.
           [20] M. Zeng, X. Tan, R. Wang, Z. Ju, T. Qin, and T.-Y. Liu, вҖңMusicBERT: Symbolic music
              understanding with large-scale pre-training,вҖқ in Proceedings of Findings of the Association for
              Computational Linguistics (ACL Findings), 2021, pp. 791вҖ“800.
                               11
           [21] Y.-S. Huang and Y.-H. Yang, вҖңPop music transformer: Beat-based modeling and generation
              of expressive pop piano compositions,вҖқ in Proceedings of ACM International Conference on
              Multimedia (MM), 2020, pp. 1180вҖ“1188.
           [22] J. W. Rae, A. Potapenko, S. M. Jayakumar, C. Hillier, and T. P. Lillicrap, вҖңCompressive
              transformers for long-range sequence modelling,вҖқ in Proceedings of International Conference
              onLearning Representations (ICLR), 2020.
           [23] S.Ding,J.Shang,S.Wang,Y.Sun,H.Tian,H.Wu,andH.Wang,вҖңERNIE-Doc: Aretrospective
              long-document modeling transformer,вҖқ in Proceedings of Annual Meeting of the Association for
              Computational Linguistics and International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing
              (ACL-IJCNLP), 2021, pp. 2914вҖ“2927.
           [24] R. Child, S. Gray, A. Radford, and I. Sutskever, вҖңGenerating long sequences with sparse
              transformers,вҖқ arXiv preprint arXiv:1904.10509, 2019.
           [25] M. Zaheer, G. Guruganesh, K. A. Dubey, J. Ainslie, C. Alberti, S. Ontanon, P. Pham, A. Ravula,
              Q. Wang, L. Yang, and A. Ahmed, вҖңBig bird: Transformers for longer sequences,вҖқ in Pro-
              ceedings of Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), vol. 33, 2020, pp.
              17283вҖ“17297.
           [26] N. Parmar, A. Vaswani, J. Uszkoreit, L. Kaiser, N. Shazeer, A. Ku, and D. Tran, вҖңImage
              transformer,вҖқ in Proceedings of International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), vol. 80,
              2018, pp. 4055вҖ“4064.
           [27] N. Kitaev, L. Kaiser, and A. Levskaya, вҖңReformer: The efficient transformer,вҖқ in Proceedings of
              International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2020.
           [28] A. Roy, M. Saffar, A. Vaswani, and D. Grangier, вҖңEfficient content-based sparse attention with
              routing transformers,вҖқ Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics (TACL),
              vol. 9, pp. 53вҖ“68, 2021.
           [29] X. Li, Y. Meng, M. Zhou, Q. Han, F. Wu, and J. Li, вҖңSac: Accelerating and structuring self-
              attention via sparse adaptive connection,вҖқ in Proceedings of Advances in Neural Information
              Processing Systems (NeurIPS), H. Larochelle, M. Ranzato, R. Hadsell, M. Balcan, and H. Lin,
              Eds., vol. 33, 2020, pp. 16997вҖ“17008.
           [30] Y. Tay, D. Bahri, L. Yang, D. Metzler, and D.-C. Juan, вҖңSparse Sinkhorn attention,вҖқ in Proceed-
              ings of International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), vol. 119, 2020, pp. 9438вҖ“9447.
           [31] C. Wu, F. Wu, T. Qi, B. Jiao, D. Jiang, Y. Huang, and X. Xie, вҖңSmart bird: Learnable sparse
              attention for efficient and effective transformer,вҖқ arXiv preprint arXiv:2108.09193, 2021.
           [32] K.Choromanski,V.Likhosherstov,D.Dohan,X.Song,A.Gane,T.Sarlos,P.Hawkins,J.Davis,
              D. Belanger, L. Colwell et al., вҖңMasked language modeling for proteins via linearly scalable
              long-context transformers,вҖқ arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.03555, 2020.
           [33] K. Choromanski, V. Likhosherstov, D. Dohan, X. Song, A. Gane, T. Sarlos, P. Hawkins,
              J. Davis, A. Mohiuddin, L. Kaiser et al., вҖңRethinking attention with performers,вҖқ arXiv preprint
              arXiv:2009.14794, 2020.
           [34] H. Peng, N. Pappas, D. Yogatama, R. Schwartz, N. Smith, and L. Kong, вҖңRandom feature
              attention,вҖқ in Proceedings of International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR),
              2021.
           [35] S. Wang, B. Z. Li, M. Khabsa, H. Fang, and H. Ma, вҖңLinformer: Self-attention with linear
              complexity,вҖқ arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.04768, 2020.
           [36] H. Zhang, Y. Gong, Y. Shen, W. Li, J. Lv, N. Duan, and W. Chen, вҖңPoolingformer: Long
              document modeling with pooling attention,вҖқ in Proceedings of International Conference on
              Machine Learning (ICML), vol. 139, 2021, pp. 12437вҖ“12446.
           [37] A. Vyas, A. Katharopoulos, and F. Fleuret, вҖңFast transformers with clustered attention,вҖқ in
              Proceedings of Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), H. Larochelle,
              M.Ranzato, R. Hadsell, M. Balcan, and H. Lin, Eds., vol. 33, 2020, pp. 21665вҖ“21674.
                               12
                          [38] C. Zhu, W. Ping, C. Xiao, M. Shoeybi, T. Goldstein, A. Anandkumar, and B. Catanzaro, вҖңLong-
                               short transformer: Efficient transformers for language and vision,вҖқ in Proceedings of Advances
                               in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), vol. 34, 2021, pp. 17723вҖ“17736.
                          [39] A. Vaswani, N. Shazeer, N. Parmar, J. Uszkoreit, L. Jones, A. N. Gomez, L. ukasz Kaiser, and
                               I. Polosukhin, вҖңAttention is all you need,вҖқ in Proceedings of Advances in Neural Information
                              Processing Systems (NIPS), 2017, pp. 5998вҖ“6008.
                          [40] C. Raffel, Learning-based methods for comparing sequences, with applications to audio-to-midi
                               alignment and matching.  Columbia University, 2016.
                          [41] N. Zheng, B. Lin, Q. Zhang, L. Ma, Y. Yang, F. Yang, Y. Wang, M. Yang, and L. Zhou, вҖңSparta:
                               Deep-learning model sparsity via tensor-with-sparsity-attribute,вҖқ in Proceedings of USENIX
                               SymposiumonOperatingSystemsDesignandImplementation (OSDI), 2022, pp. 213вҖ“232.
                          [42] J. Liu, Y. Dong, Z. Cheng, X. Zhang, X. Li, F. Yu, and M. Sun, вҖңSymphony generation with
                               permutation invariant language model,вҖқ arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.05448, 2022.
                          Checklist
                               1. For all authors...
                                   (a) Do the main claims made in the abstract and introduction accurately reflect the paperвҖҷs
                                       contributions and scope? [Yes]
                                   (b) Did you describe the limitations of your work? [Yes]
                                   (c) Did you discuss any potential negative societal impacts of your work? [N/A] We do
                                       not see any potential negative societal impacts of our work.
                                   (d) Have you read the ethics review guidelines and ensured that your paper conforms to
                                       them? [Yes]
                               2. If you are including theoretical results...
                                   (a) Did you state the full set of assumptions of all theoretical results? [N/A]
                                   (b) Did you include complete proofs of all theoretical results? [N/A]
                               3. If you ran experiments...
                                   (a) Did you include the code, data, and instructions needed to reproduce the main experi-
                                       mental results (either in the supplemental material or as a URL)? [Yes]
                                   (b) Did you specify all the training details (e.g., data splits, hyperparameters, how they
                                      were chosen)? [Yes]
                                   (c) Did you report error bars (e.g., with respect to the random seed after running experi-
                                       ments multiple times)? [N/A]
                                   (d) Did you include the total amount of compute and the type of resources used (e.g., type
                                       of GPUs, internal cluster, or cloud provider)? [Yes]
                               4. If you are using existing assets (e.g., code, data, models) or curating/releasing new assets...
                                   (a) If your work uses existing assets, did you cite the creators? [Yes]
                                   (b) Did you mention the license of the assets? [N/A]
                                   (c) Did you include any new assets either in the supplemental material or as a URL? [N/A]
                                   (d) Did you discuss whether and how consent was obtained from people whose data youвҖҷre
                                       using/curating? [N/A]
                                   (e) Didyoudiscusswhetherthedatayouareusing/curatingcontainspersonallyidentifiable
                                       information or offensive content? [N/A]
                               5. If you used crowdsourcing or conducted research with human subjects...
                                   (a) Did you include the full text of instructions given to participants and screenshots, if
                                       applicable? [Yes]
                                   (b) Did you describe any potential participant risks, with links to Institutional Review
                                       Board (IRB) approvals, if applicable? [N/A]
                                   (c) Did you include the estimated hourly wage paid to participants and the total amount
                                       spent on participant compensation? [N/A]
                                                                      13
